
Near the town of Connel, the flatlands in the distance trembled as if a great wave
crested just beneath its surface. Like distant thunder, a growing rumble swept forward
and broke the peace and serenity of the farmlands. The grinding roar gave only short
notice as the wave of convulsion rolled forward with uniform power.
The people of this region were not accustomed to earthquakes, though some had
experienced a small vibration perhaps once in their lifetimes. This, however, was no
slight tremor, nor was it a massive quake that people of the west have often spoke of… an
all encompassing upheaval that spreads like ripples on disturbed water. This was power
unleashed yet also confined at the same time. The quake took the pure form of a single
rolling tremor, an unbroken line of disturbance stretching north to south, its ends out of
sight. The land in front and behind the convulsion remained calm and steady, but the
ground at the point of the crest lifted up as if it were being pushed away by a thousand
angry souls long-buried in the soil.
The fury of the disturbance lashed out upon all in its path. The few trees which spotted
the landscape as markers for farmers resisted the tremor, but as the upheaval rolled past
their roots, a few shifted to lean at slight angles from the ground. Fence posts bolted into
the air like thrown javelins. Shepherd dogs howled, and the panicked livestock wandering
the fields raced in every direction. Fortunately, the ground did not split beneath them.
Though the tremor tussled them, threw them to and fro, no true injury befell a single
animal.
The distress of the animals caught the attention of the farmers. As they peered out
among their vast stretches of land, they witnessed the on-coming tremor. They stared
with dumbfounded shock. They had faced storms, draughts and floods. They had endured
swarms of crop eating insects and diseases which threatened their livestock. They had
suffered through all of this with perseverance, with a belief that these were simply
challenges to overcome. Never before had they encountered the land itself rising up
against them. They looked to the tremor with abhorrence, as well as panic.
As the quake rumbled onward, its path was unmistakable. It would first surge below
their own barns and houses before heading toward the very center of town. The potential
jeopardy broke the incapacitating shock, and farmers hastened to action. Neighbors
needed to be warned, animals tended.
The alarm spread from the furthest limits inward to the more populated areas of
Connel. From the farmlands, calls went out from neighbor to neighbor. A single word of
"Quake!" brought disbelief first, frenzy second as the never ending rumble washed away
any doubts.
In the town, bells rang to alert the public. Shouts raged from the confusion, and soon,
the entire town raised an ear to the commotion. At Connel's heart, merchants and citizens
alike stumbled about with a near dazed sense of confusion. As of yet, they could not see
the tremor, but the word spread of it like fire on alcohol. When the distant rumble caught
their ears, they believed, and they feared what was to come.
The farmhouses to the far west were the first to feel the surging power. Strong men
and women raced quickly to their animals, to free them from barns which they feared
might collapse. Horses and mules kicked at their stalls as farmers fought against time and
panic to open each barn door. They loosed their teams to the open fields, knowing there
they would be safe. They did not feel as secure about themselves or their homes.
They braced themselves over open ground as the rumbling bore down upon them. The
dirt rose beneath their feet, sending many of them sprawling. The surging disturbance
raised the ground above the height of a tall man's knees. Again, the soil did not break. As
quickly as it rose, it fell back, leveling out as if nothing had happened.
The tremor rolled apathetically beneath barns and farmhouses alike. The structures
quivered with the upheaval. They shook and rattled, they danced and moved. Dilapidated
shacks crumbled into muddled piles of wood and debris, but the sturdier buildings
withstood the barrage of force, sustaining only minor damage.
Farmers took back to their feet. With a heavy breath of relief for their own safety, they
watched with concern as the ripple now raced toward Connel's center.
The next obstacle in the path of the tremor was an ancient stonewall which surrounded
most of the town. Built generations ago, it stood as one of the oldest landmarks of
Connel. Only the Night Watch Inn, the Church of Godson, and two private homes could
boast of a longer existence. Many other older buildings had long since been torn down
and replaced with more modern structures.
The wall's age did not bring it any glory or respect. Its purpose or any battles fought at
its base had long been forgotten. The townspeople merely ignored it these days, or
viewed it as a nuisance when roads needed to be built extending beyond its limits.
The wall was wider than it was tall. Its height barely reached the shoulders of an
average man, but its stout thickness made it difficult to remove. Its substance of heavy
stone and mortar allowed it to survive these long ages with little wear. Breaking through
a section was a mighty task. Even the most skilled engineers marveled at its intrinsic
strength. More often than not, the soil was built up around the wall, and any construction
went over rather than through it. Fortunately, though the wall encircled the entire town, it
enclosed a wide expanse of land. For whatever reason it was built, it far exceeded the
original outskirts of Connel’s earlier size. Connel expanded many times over the
centuries, and only now did it just begin to spill beyond some sections of the wall.
As the tremor rolled in from the farmlands, the alerted townspeople looked toward this
barrier to gauge the strength of the rolling upheaval. The wave of energy would strike the
foundation of the wall before reaching any significant portion of the town. Fearing more
for their homes than for the existence of the ancient barrier, many hoped the stone
construction would bear the full brunt of the tremor, thus saving their shops, offices, and
homes.
The tremor rolled forward, ready to greet the wall with the full fury of its power.
When it struck, the barrier did not give. It did not shake, or for that matter react in
anyway whatsoever to the violence underneath it. Dirt and dust flew into the air, a brown
haze that followed the tremor like an obedient dog. It obscured the clash only for a
moment. As the dust settled, the true victor was obvious. The wall remained in place;
firm, strong and silent.
Strangely, after passing beneath the ancient bulwark, the disturbance appeared smaller
and weaker. While it jostled the onlookers, it did not throw them with the same force
which bore upon the farmers. While large structures shook and trembled, they did not rise
from the ground or twist with great disorder. At the two points where the tremor
remained in contact with the ancient wall, the disturbance was almost imperceptible. To
the relief of the townspeople, the tremor moved through Connel as if in weary retreat.
After passing through the heart of the town and beyond the eastern limits, the rolling
quake reared up for one more massive head-on confrontation with the stone barrier. The
quake disappeared underneath the barrier which remained silent and unmoving. When the
tremor resurfaced, it cleared all contact with the wall. It appeared to return to its original
strength, and it rolled through the clearings of the east with renewed power.
As the danger passed, so too did the concern of the townspeople. The frenzy of the
event dissipated. The shouts and alarms ceased and the confusion disappeared. Slowly
but steadily, the people returned to their homes, thankful for the reprieve and ready to
discuss the excitement throughout the day. Inspectors and engineers were dispatched to
assess the damage, which was nearly nonexistent. A single work crew set out to repair a
few roads and one bridge.
As the day wore on, most Connel residents quickly returned to their daily activities.
Markets opened as usual and people walked the streets with hardly a care. The land
remained calm from both the west and the east. With so little damage, the tremor turned
to nothing more than an oddity for idle chat.
To some, however, the quake presented opportunity. The town council, consisting of
four men and one woman, all with business concerns and political aspirations, met that
same day to discuss the tremor.
They gathered in the conference room of the town hall, a building of fairly recent
construction. The room was large but uninviting. Portraits of previous council members
adorned the walls. The faces in these paintings tried diligently to portray an air of
dignified importance. The current members carried themselves with the same ingenuous
attitude. They sat around an oblong oak meeting table. Stacks of paper waited patiently
for their review. The mayor, Edward Consprite, brought the meeting to order.
"The first thing we should do," he said with a deep voice, "is read the initial damage
reports into the record."
He placed a pair of reading glasses upon the bridge of his pudgy nose and picked up
the engineer's preliminary report. He spoke clearly and firmly as he read the findings
aloud. His voice reaffirmed the overwhelming arrogance which exuded from his person
like the smell of day old fish. When finished, he waved the papers pompously in front of
him.
"I realize that this report tells us nothing we don't already know," he exclaimed. "I'm
sure the rest of you did as I did and took a look around before coming here. I saw nothing
which would indicate that anyone received any true damage. I do expect, however, that
we will have to look out for those hoping to make false claims. I'm sure there are more
than a few undesirables that may see this as a chance to gain access to public funds. You
know what I mean, some poor slob thinks his house is starting to wear down and will
come to us saying the quake damaged his home. He'll expect we use town funds to repair
problems that existed seasons ago. We simply can't allow that."
Consprite paused for a moment and reflected upon his own devious thoughts. He
shuffled papers about as if looking for a particular report. "We also, however, should not
be so unsympathetic as to refuse funds to those that truly suffered damage. After all, an
earthquake is an act of God, so to speak. We have to help the truly deserving members of
our community in these trying times. I did notice some small damage to some of the local
establishments very near here. They only appeared as small cracks in the foundation, but
we can't let these things go without quick repair. Some of these establishments serve
every member on this board. In order to show our gratitude, uh excuse me, our
understanding to their plight, I suggest we set aside ten percent of the town funds to
refurbish these local enterprises. Any objections?"
Samuel Cofort spoke quickly and with an edge to his voice. "I will not object as long
as another two percent of the fund is apportioned for repairs to the town hall. I'm sure this
very meeting room, as well of some of the offices, might need repairs. For all we know,
the very chairs we are sitting on may have received some unseen damage. It would be
wise to correct such problems before anyone gets hurt. I think it would also be a good
idea to replace the older furniture in our personal offices."
Consprite nodded his head in knowing approval. "I agree, Samuel. Forgive me for
being so shortsighted as not to recognize such a splendid idea myself." He turned his
head to the others around the table. "Any other suggestions?"
"I have a question," Elizabeth Bent exclaimed with a challenging tone. Her position as
the only woman upon the council gave her status in the community, but she thirsted for
more. "Who will decide which establishments receive funds and how much?"
Consprite did not hesitate in responding. "We shall form a committee of two. As
mayor, I shall take one seat and, since you raised the concern, you will have the other.
The committee shall be responsible for distributing funds. Does this meet with your
approval?"
"Yes it does," she replied with a guarded smile.
The final two council members were about to object but Consprite, as was his way,
spoke quickly to make the situation quite clear. "Fine, with your support as well as
Samuel's, we already have the necessary three votes to approve the measure. Although
any opposition may be viewed as hostile toward the town in a time of need, I will now
ask any council member opposed to speak for the record."
The room remained quiet.
Consprite did not allow the silence to prevail for long. "Now that we have quickly and
judiciously met the immediate needs created by this incident, I open the floor to other
suggestions on how we may best serve the town."
The councilwoman again seized the opportunity to take the initiative. "I suggest we
send out investigators to the east and west. I think it may serve us well if we identify how
other areas fared against this small quake. Other towns may not have been as fortunate as
our own. There may be a need for labor and materials of which we might be able to
supply, for a fee of course."
"I see," Consprite grunted as he placed a hand to his smoothly shaven chin.
The councilwoman proceeded as the mayor continued to solemnly reflect upon the
suggestion.
"I know of many shopkeepers with a surplus of certain goods. I'm sure they would be
grateful if they found an immediate market for their items. There are also a few artisans
available that I'm sure would be willing to extend their talents to out of town
opportunities, especially if the price is right. While our town is growing, there are still
carpenters and masons eager to find new jobs. This quake may have created such an
opportunity."
"An interesting proposal," Consprite hummed with an equally guarded tone. The
prospect seemed inviting, but he found it distasteful that the idea was presented by Bent.
He knew of her secret desires to unseat him as mayor. It was his gift to see through the
charade of others, to understand the motivations, the aspirations, and the desires of both
his friends and foes. He would only allow Bent to take his place if he was able to move
up the political ladder, not down. Thus, he dealt with most of her proposals with great
care. "And how should we proceed with such an initiative?”
“I suggest we send someone who will investigate and send us word of the situation
before we get involved. That way, we appear concerned with our neighbors but not
foolhardy. I suggest we hire delvers. They will move across the countryside far faster
than any of us. They can assess the situation and make first contact with those needing
the greatest help."
"Yes, yes," Consprite said quickly. He turned a pen in his fingers. "This is very true.
We would not waste time or effort in the less lucrative areas. Any delver worth his salt
would surely give us a great advantage." He looked up with a nod of acceptance. "I
heartily approve."
"I oppose the measure," Cofort said sullenly. "I do not trust delvers. They always
require large payments and no one can ever really tell if they do what they say they do.
No one can follow them, no one can check up on them."
"I realize that delvers are expensive," Consprite admitted candidly, "but that's because
no one can do the job they can do. I realize that it is difficult to check on them, but just
imagine if we sent out regular men. They would need a week’s worth of supplies and
equipment. Surely, that more than offsets the larger payment for the services of a delver."
"But we don't know that the damage to other towns was any worse than it was here,"
Cofort insisted. "If so, we will have paid a delver for nothing."
"True, but it's also just as possible that villages east and west of here may require a
good deal of our supplies and labor. I'm not willing to miss that opportunity."
Cofort heaved a heavy sigh. He would not, however, give up his complaint so easily.
"I still say we can't trust them."
"I don't really trust anyone," Consprite admitted in a cold voice. "And I don't really
care for delvers all that much, either. But they are, as I said before, the best suited for this
task. We're not asking them to guard our funds, we're asking them to scout out territory,
and that is what they do. Now, I don't want to hear anymore about not wanting to hire
delvers. We've done it before, and they have come in most useful. I move that we enlist
two delvers, one to go due west and another to explore east. Who will second?"
"I second the motion," the councilwoman said brusquely while she glared at Cofort.
"Fine. If there is no other opposition, the measure is passed."
The final two council members remained silent.
Consprite now detected a chance to drop a potentially difficult problem into the
councilwoman's lap. Seeking out delvers was not always a favorable activity. Their skills
made them great spies and the ignorant often identified them with treachery. It would
certainly not do well for any of the council members if they were seen cavorting with
delvers and perhaps making secret deals. He clasped his hands together and spoke almost
innocently, as if that were possible, about the prospect.
"It seems all we have to do now is find and hire delvers for the job. I think Elizabeth
should handle this, seeing it was her idea." He looked to her almost defying her to protest,
but she did not. He continued with a calculating tone. "I take it that means you accept.
Since this is a delicate matter, I suggest you find two of the better delvers. Send them off
immediately. You can pay them up to half of their fee before they leave. I'll leave the
negotiations to you. I would suggest you send the more trustworthy you find to explore
the west. It is there where the quake originated. I have a feeling that they'll find
something important, and I've learned to trust these feelings. They've got me where I am
now."

The town council was not alone in its interest over the quake. Members of the Church
of Godson also could not simply forget the earlier tremor. Their attention, however,
seemed edged more out of concern, almost fear. While its attendants were few, confusion
and alarm prevailed through their numbers hours after the quake passed. The followers
gathered all that day. Many came out at frequent intervals, stood upon the tall stone steps,
and looked out to the west with a grim burden. The church's leader, an inconspicuous
gentleman, continuously appeared at the door to calm the members and guide them back
inside. He himself, however, could not avoid glancing out to the west with an equally
pained expression.
This anxiety was noticed by those who passed the church, but it was discounted. Town
residents simply shrugged or shook their heads. They considered what they knew of these
zealots, and rumor and gossip constantly questioned the very sanity of the Godson sect.
On the whole, the church and its small group of followers appeared gripped by
legends of nonsense, legends which included such bizarre creatures that anyone of
rational thought must dismiss as pure fable. If this church spoke of powerful mages and
sorcerers, where were such wizards today? And what of these strange races which
supposedly coexisted with humans? It was all obvious madness. Yet, rumors raced wildly
that this was the embodiment of the church's beliefs.
The distaste for the Church of Godson was almost understandable, for Connel was
populated solely by humans. Of all the wild creatures rumored as part of the church's text,
only the delver existed within the realm of the humans. Certainly, that was not enough to
substantiate the presence of other strange races, and no where near sufficient to bring any
credence to the followers of Godson. Thus, the attendants were usually ridiculed or
ignored, as they were ignored this day.

Ryson Acumen, a purebred delver, moved quickly on foot toward the setting sun. The
soles of his boots barely grazed the surface of the road, creating just enough impact to
propel him forward. The soft step reduced the chance of leaving a trail as well as
lessening the amount of friction which might slow him. The striking of foot against
ground conceived the lightest of sounds, nearly inaudible until he was upon you. How
strange this sight was; pumping legs moving like pistons at break neck speed, yet with
near silence and total control. He moved like most delvers moved, as if blessed with the
grace of an angel flying among the clouds.
While it appeared this delver was running swiftly, in truth, Ryson was merely setting a
comfortable scouting pace. His face revealed his ease with the stride. His mouth shut,
breathing through his nose, he showed no signs of physical exertion. He might as well
have been resting upon a soft, feather bed. It was the gift of the delver. He could keep this
step for many hours without any discomfort.
Ryson's physical presentation included a trim, fit body; from his narrow shoulders
down through his long legs. His arms, also long but not to the point of gangly, draped
gracefully from his shoulders. His movements were always smooth and precise. His face
was only slightly narrower than most, and his features maintained the balance. A crop of
short, well-kept hair rode the top of his head. He grew his hair longer once, but the
rustling behind his ears interfered with his keen hearing.
Still, with his physical stature as it was, he needed only to act as the common man,
and no one would ever identify his delver heritage. But Ryson ran through the town at
this particular moment because his delver soul was filled with much too much
anticipation. Even as he pressed onward, his mind filled with memories of the quake. The
rumble of the tremor echoed as clearly in his mind as if it were still passing under foot. It
was not so much the tremor itself which thrilled him, but the results which it may have
left behind. It constituted the opportunity for new exploration. It was this, as well as his
meeting with Elizabeth Bent, that drove him with eager anticipation.
As he moved toward Connel's town square, he considered his earlier conversation
with the councilwoman. While he believed the quake would create an opportunity for his
skills, he never believed she would agree to pay so much. He blessed his own luck as he
considered his task, a task perfect for a delver. A task he might have set out to complete
on his own had he not found a willing employer.
Quakes were rare in this part of the world. In fact, Ryson never experienced one
before this morning. He did know that they carried the power to change the land, land
which he scouted many times before. After watching the quake roll past Connel, Ryson
actually felt something call to him. The very air bristled with subtle changes somewhere
beyond the horizon. A deep instinct awakened and the desire to scout the land emerged
with great force. It pressed upon his senses to strike out and investigate. Deep within him,
he realized that what he had once examined and had placed into his great memory was no
longer the same. Perhaps the entire land of Uton had been altered, and it was his fortune
to determine how. So strong was his instincts, he felt the need to leave immediately.
With no family in town, Ryson did not hesitate to begin his scout. As for equipment, a
delver needed little. That which was most important, he carried with him always. It
included a knife, a short rope, and a spyscope. Everything else, such as food and shelter,
could be found along the journey.
Thus, the able-bodied delver departed with no further delay. With half of a sizeable
payment already in his pouch, he moved westward to the beckoning lands with euphoria.
So great was his anticipation over what he might find, he moved passed Connel's citizens
with near disregard until someone called for his attention.
"Delver!" A voice called out. It held a strong tone, yet concern was also evident.
Ryson brought himself to an immediate halt. Amazingly, the delver showed no sign of
imbalance at such an instantaneous stop.
He faced the origin of the voice which called to him. He was already well aware of his
exact location, for he always kept his bearings when moving. With but a subtle glance of
familiar territory, a delver could reveal more about his surroundings than an ordinary man
could recite even after taking hours to study. He stood at the steps of the Church of
Godson and the leader of the church waited just outside the front door.
The leader, dressed just as any other man of town, took a few steps downward and
motioned for Ryson to meet him halfway.
Ryson acknowledged with a nod and slowly proceeded upward, one step at a time. He
stopped two steps below the church leader, yet high enough to command a strategic view
of the surrounding area.
"Yes sir?" Ryson said reflecting a tone of politeness as well as respect.
"I am Reader Matthew," the middle-aged man said plainly. If he was proud of his
position in his small church, it did not show in his tempered speech. He bowed slightly at
Ryson.
"I know, sir," Ryson bowed in return.
Matthew showed little emotion other than concern to a distant problem.
"And I am aware that you are Ryson Acumen, full-blood delver."
"I am."
While Ryson continued to feel a great urge to move quickly upon his quest, he curbed
his impatience. He waited respectfully for Reader Matthew to continue.
Matthew acknowledged Ryson's honor with a thankful smile before returning a weary
gaze to the west.
"You are no doubt setting out on a mission of exploration," the reader stated
succinctly. "You are moving west. It pleases me to see this. May I ask you of your
objectives?"
"Certainly," Ryson responded without hesitation. Councilwoman Bent said nothing
about maintaining secrecy over the matter; otherwise he would have kept a measure of
discretion. Instead, she made it plain that the entire town council had asked for the
delver's assistance. In fact, she was not at all cautious when making her request. She had
spoken as if she wanted everyone in the tavern to hear, thus he treated the request as if it
were public knowledge. "I'm to explore the lands and towns west of Connel. After I've
investigated how our neighbors have fared against this morning's quake, I'll send reports
back to the town council by courier. I'm to report as to damage and the need for labor and
materials."
"How far are you commissioned to travel?"
Ryson considered the question for a moment before replying. "To Burbon and
Pinesway. That appeared to be the greatest concern. There's not much beyond that that I
think the council might be interested in."
"What are your own personal objectives?" Matthew asked with a delicate tone.
Again Ryson answered without hesitation, but he glanced over his shoulder as he
spoke. "I want to know more about this tremor, what it might have done."
Matthew nodded his head. "That is good. I have a charge for you. I hope you will
accept it."
Ryson did not speak. He waited for the reader to announce his request.
Matthew exhaled deeply before continuing. "I need to know what has happened. I
need to know where this quake came from. And I also need to know how the land has
changed. I can offer you no payment. I can only hope that you will include me in your
reports. I will also hope that you continue your journey even if it means venturing far
beyond the limits of your original employer's wishes. I ask that you continue west until
you find the source of this quake, if of course that's possible."
"I doubt finding the source would be difficult," Ryson responded with certainty. It was
not with arrogance he spoke, but with calm confidence in understanding the land. "All I
have to do is find the area of greatest upheaval. That should indicate where the quake
began."
"Then will you do this for me?"
Ryson reflected upon the proposal with obvious hesitation.
His silence brought anxiety to the reader. Not wishing to be turned down, the reader
hoped to entice the delver further. "If it is payment you need, I may be able to scrape
something together. We are a poor church, but this is of ..."
Ryson politely interrupted. "It's not that. I've already been hired and I don't see a
conflict in sending you reports. I would also be more than happy to inform you of what I
find beyond my work for the council."
Hopeful expectation blanketed the face of the reader. "Then you'll do it?"
"I don't know if I can," Ryson responded with all honesty. He did not wish to dampen
the spirits of the reader, but he also felt the need not to misguide him. "I’m not just
dismissing your request, but I don’t know what I’m going to find out there. Right now the
source of the quake interests my instincts enough so I want to know more, but that could
change quickly depending on what I find. It would be hard to follow a trail of dust if I
come across something of greater interest. Do you understand?"
"I do, but I don't think that will be a problem," Matthew reflected. His expression still
held hope, yet it also included deep deliberation. He appeared to be placing the limits of
logic upon his own dilemma. With a satisfied nod of his head, he continued. "If the quake
does hold importance, for me as well as for you, it will continue to pull upon you. If it
does not, then my own anxieties over the matter will be eased just as well. You are a
delver with keen insights. I simply have to trust your instincts."
Ryson kept his eyes upon the reader, but he chose his words and tone carefully. He did
not wish to insult the reader, but Matthew's request, if not his concern, created questions
of his own. "If you don't mind, what is it that's bothering you? I haven't had much
contact with people of your faith, but I've never known any of them to show such
concern. Your own admission has me thinking about what I might find."
"The truth is, I have no idea what you will find," the reader stated plainly, the gleam in
his eyes giving way to the resurgence of that which disturbed him. "That is what truly
bothers me. It has been some time since I have had to deal with the unknown. I must
admit, I do not like it."
"We all deal with the unknown," Ryson commented with skepticism. "Forgive me for
saying so, but I still don't understand why it's upsetting you so much. I have seen the
people of your church face much more serious problems without showing the same
concern. Truthfully, I have always admired that. Because I want to help you find what it
is you're looking for, I have to ask again, what makes this quake so distressing?"
Matthew smiled upon the delver. "You honor your people. If that has not been said to
you before, it is long overdue. You show respect with honesty. I shall try to do the same.
The truth is that we do not face the unknown as the rest of the town. We are blessed with
knowledge of things to come. People of this church follow the Book of Godson. It
contains many prophesies, but it describes them in elaborate fashion. An ordinary
follower or reader, including myself, has a difficult time understanding the true meaning.
Roughly ten cycles ago, however, we were blessed by a visit from a believer with a great
power of understanding. I will not reveal his name out of respect for his own wishes.
During his stay, he revealed to us the meaning of many of the prophesies. He explained
them clearly and in our own language, and he actually told us what to expect over the
many cycles to come. Amazingly, each and every one of his interpretations occurred just
as he explained. We studied his work and soon we were prepared for every major event
which would affect this land before it would even happen. When we heard rumors, we
knew which were true and which were not. The interpretations have guided us in that
respect and we have relied on them ever since.
"To the people of this church, the interpretations have become a great source of
strength and hope. They project great things for those that hold to the works of Godson.
The interpreter told us of a time when this land would become a place of peace. While I
can not reveal to you his work, I can tell you that many of the prophesies have not
occurred and are not scheduled to occur for many cycles."
"I really don't see what the problem is," Ryson admitted.
"The problem is that this quake was not prophesied to us. The translator made no
mention of such an event in any of his writings. Yet, we have grown accustomed to
knowing such events before they occur. Unfortunately, this morning we faced the quake
just as the rest of the town, with no warning and no idea that it was coming. For us, this is
most unusual. It is also most discomforting. Some of our members are wondering if the
interpretations are now in danger of failing. This would be a terrible event, for we have
grown to base all of our hopes on these same interpretations."
"What has the translator to say of this?"
"We can not ask him. His stay with us was only for a few seasons. Such was his way.
He would stay temporarily at each church explaining the meaning of the prophesies
before moving on to the next. If he were here, he might be able to explain what is wrong,
but he is not."
Ryson considered the tale, scratched the side of his face as he offered his own
explanation. "Could he have just missed this one? Or maybe it wasn't even in the
prophecies."
The reader shook his head. "Every major event has been prophesied and translated for
us. I can't believe he missed it."
"What if it wasn't a major event?" Ryson offered. "Maybe this was just a minor
incident?"
"Is that what you really think?" the reader eyed him questioningly.
The delver raised an eyebrow and sniffed the air around him. To his senses, he already
noticed subtle alterations. "I'm not sure. I sense changes, something in the air. But how
important… I just don’t know."
"I'm sure you can sense things which are beyond my reckoning," the reader allowed
and once again his focus shifted to the lands to the west, "but what about the tremor
itself? Wouldn't you consider experiencing a quake in these parts as out of the ordinary?
I'm not even sure of when the last recorded tremor came upon these lands."
"I would have to agree. The actual quake was a unique event. But who knows how
important it really was?" Ryson kicked lightly at the stone steps of the ancient church.
"From what I've seen so far, the quake has done little to leave its mark. There's hardly a
damaged building to be found. Maybe that's why your prophet failed to alert you to its
coming."
"I have thought of this myself,” the reader allowed. “It is what I'm saying to comfort
the others. It is not, however, making any of us rest easier. We have spent much of the
day going over the work of the translator in hopes of finding something we might have
missed. We have even gone as far as attempting to interpret prophesies in different ways.
We have not done this since the translator made his visit. But our attempts have been
useless. It's a daunting task and we have not been able to find any reference to this
strange tremor. It continues to disturb us all, and as I look upon you, my doubts become
even heavier."
Ryson looked thoughtfully at the reader. "Why is that? Have I said anything which
bothered you?"
"No, no!" Matthew said apologetically. "It is not in what you have said. Instead, it is
in the heightened excitement I sense within you. Your natural instincts are driving you to
explore the lands and investigate what has happened. I can see that and that is precisely
what worries me. I think your powerful senses might be telling us that there is something
important out there."
Ryson shook his head doubtfully. "I wouldn't be so certain. I admit my urge is strong,
but I've never been able to rely upon that with any certainty. There may be nothing more
to see than a few cracks in the land or a broken road. I simply won't be able to tell what's
out there until I make my exploration."
Matthew nodded in agreement. "That is why I have made this request of you. If you
report to us that the quake left little mark on our world, than we will all sleep easier."
Ryson held out his hand in friendly reassurance. "Then, I’ll ask you to relax, for now.
I'll include you in my reports, and I’ll let you know if there is anything to worry about
only when I find it. Due to the nature of your concerns, I will limit my reports to include
only the changes I find and not to those seeking supplies or building materials," Ryson
smiled broadly in hopes of breaking the tension which gripped the reader.
The reader chuckled. "Thank you. I doubt we could offer any real help. Leave that to
the council."
"I will," Ryson replied with a continued smile, "but I will tell you what I see and what
I find. I'll let you interpret this as you see fit. As to finding the source of the quake, I'll
make every attempt to find it, but if I do break off my search, I will send you word."
"That is all I can ask, even more." The reader placed his hand upon Ryson's shoulder.
"Go now and do not hesitate to report any of your findings. I need to know the bad as
well as the good."

At its infancy, Connel sat nestled on the edge of the largest pine forest in the land of
Uton. The trees stretched to the south, west and northwest for untold lengths until giving
way to rocky ground or mountains. Hills abounded beyond the reaches of the forest as
gateways to other landscapes. A scorching desert waited past rocky ravines to the
southwest, and hundreds of snow-capped mountains towered over the horizon in the
north. A few scattered peaks stood directly west; forming a jagged boundary between the
eastern flatland prairies and the western coastlands.
As Connel became more populated, pioneers moved further beyond its limits. Dark
Spruce began to shrink steadily as thousands of trees were cleared to create the outlying
farmlands. Two new western outposts were also developed, though in much more recent
history. The settling of these towns and the increase in farming eventually removed the
forest from Connel's sight. While Dark Spruce remained a large stretch of woodland to
the south and southwest, the vein which strove northward was reduced to a narrow band.
This thin extension served as a small border between the newly colonized towns and the
western mountains.
At the outset of his exploration, Ryson scoured the countryside to the immediate west
of Connel. He concentrated first on the pastures and farmlands. Moving on foot at speeds
defying human understanding, he covered wide areas while the sun barely moved
overhead. His eyes scanned the wide-open lands. He stopped only momentarily to speak
with farmers in the field or merchants on the road. To his satisfaction, these outlying
lands received little damage.
Finding only traces of the quake's path in the farmlands, he turned his attention to the
neighboring outposts, Burbon and Pinesway. Each received more damage than Connel,
but nothing which could not be repaired within a season or two. A few buildings had
suffered structural impairment and more than one road had crumbled, but the lasting
consequences of the tremor were insignificant. Like nothing more than a strong storm
passing through the night, the quake had come and gone. The damage was merely
temporary as no lives were lost and no permanent alterations in the land could be found.
Ryson's investigations within the towns took greater time than his explorations over
the open flatlands. Most of those he met were not accustomed to his pace, and the delver
slowed to match their needs. Days passed as he made several contacts with people of both
towns. He promised them additional supplies and labor from Connel at prices to be
negotiated with a second representative, probably councilwoman Bent.
During this time, he dispatched messages to the council and to Reader Matthew. He
detailed his findings, described the degree of all damage. He continued his investigation
until he assessed all prospective sites that would be of interest to the council. He sent a
final message appraising them of everything he had discovered. He advised one member
to make the journey to represent Connel and offered his own estimates of needed
supplies. With his duty to the council fulfilled, he turned his attention back to the path of
the quake. He sent word to the reader that following the quake's path would lead him into
the dense tree-covered regions of Dark Spruce. The lack of any villages within the forest
would create a lag before he could send his next communication. He ended his note by
promising to forward another message as soon as possible.
Ryson moved westward without further delay. After passing beyond the limits of
Pinesway, he soon entered the vast forest. At his point of entry into the woodlands, no
road broke through the trees and no footpath existed for travel. A staggered multitude of
tree trunks filled the landscape, created a broken labyrinth of infinite paths. While
underbrush was light, due to the dense shade of the evergreens, the ground remained
uneven and rocky. Large roots jutted up from the soil, creating even more obstacles.
Ryson glided over such hindrances as if they did not exist.
He carried nothing which might impede his progress. Even as he advanced into pure
wilderness, he ignored thoughts of extra rations of food or water. He brought nothing
more than his basic supplies. The forest itself would provide Ryson with everything he
needed. Food and shelter were plentiful. He would eat the seeds, nuts, and succulent
fruits of all the indigenous trees. He would drink from streams or dig below the roots for
ground water. He would sleep within the pines, using the thick branches for shelter and
security.
As for getting lost in such a dense forest, that remained a human calamity. Humans
saw the forest as an obstacle between two points. They conceived themselves lost when
they could no longer determine the correct path toward their destination or back to their
point of departure. A delver, however, was never lost, for a delver did not think in terms
of which was the correct path. Even a forest as large as Dark Spruce was viewed in
whole. Being lost meant being unable to find a way. For someone with Ryson's skills,
there was always a way to travel, a path to cross.
Ryson explored Dark Spruce on previous occasions. The largest and closest forest to
his adopted home of Connel often enticed him. Pioneers looking for new lands to conquer
would also employ him for such missions. In his first trips to the northern branch, he
actually began his investigations with great anticipation. Such an immense area must
have held untold secrets. To his disappointment, he never found anything more than the
legion of ancient trees. Large sturdy trunks growing boldly to the sky filled the landscape
with a universal sameness. The number of branches remained somewhat stunted at
ground level, but they increased as one looked skyward. They created a complete blanket
of green which could block out the sun with ease. Ryson's eyes faced little difficulty, for
they could adjust to even greater darkness, but for his own desires, the forest held little
for him to see.
As the delver entered Dark Spruce upon this day, he did so with only slight arousal.
The forest held out no special enticement. It only offered the trail of the quake; slightly
uprooted trees and shifted broken soil. The traces of the disturbance granted only a slight
distraction from the monotony of Dark Spruce, and he walked and climbed for half the
morning before he found anything of true interest.
As the sounds of Pinesway faded from his acute hearing, he began to pick up the faint
traces of a pungent odor. As he raced onward, he discovered larger pockets of the
objectionable scent lingering about. It piqued his curiosity, called for his attention. The
smell hung heavy in the air. It smelled of rot. The decay, however, was out of place. It
was not the decomposition of the forest which created this odor. It was simply too
powerful to be the emanation of rotting leaves or grass.
As the stench became more prevalent, so did the delver's curiosity. Ryson stopped. He
paused to take a greater sample of the air through his nose. His nostrils flared. He turned
about to sniff the light breeze which filtered through the branches overhead. Part of the
rank odor became unmistakable. It held the ghastly smell of rotting flesh. Perhaps an
animal, a large animal like a deer, died somewhere nearby. Yet, the smell also contained
traces of another scent, an odor which separated itself from the decay. Unique in its
properties, Ryson could only liken it to the static smell of a summer lightning storm.
Even the very air which contained the stench seemed charged.
Unable to distinguish anything more from the odor, Ryson pushed forward, but he
moved with a mind to this new mystery. His concentration shifted away from the quake,
and the instincts which are his as a delver began to guide him. The secret behind the
stench became his mission.
As he stepped forward, the scent did not always become noticeably stronger. In certain
places, it remained constant and Ryson found it difficult to choose a direction. More than
once, he circled about his current position before selecting a path. To the delver's
satisfaction, the smell did not dissipate. It continued to beckon him and overpowered
anything else which might call to his attention.
With thoughts of the quake almost extinct, the delver began to break in a southern
direction. With his nose in the air, he paid little attention to the growing thickness of the
trees. Greater coverage of branches overhead blocked more and more of the sunlight. The
ground stretched out before him, etched with crusty, bark covered trunks and obscured in
shady darkness. He continued to move with the fluid grace befitting a true delver. His
stride carried him faster than the running of a frightened rabbit, and his ability to step
lightly over uneven ground kept him from stumbling upon the bulging roots.
With Ryson's attention fixed solely upon what his nose revealed to him, he relied little
upon his sight. His vision simply aided him in crossing the forest, until it revealed to him
the object of his search.
Ryson stopped immediately. His senses erupted as the unimaginable stood before him.
The stench leaped in potency, at least tenfold, and there was no doubt that it was indeed
the outpouring of rotting flesh. But this, this was no deer. It was a man, or what was left
of one.
The degree of decay was staggering. The flesh cracked and shriveled, split and oozed.
The stench and the pus attracted insects of all sizes. Flies, big and small, buzzed about
like a shifting, black cloud. They landed on loose flesh and scurried about exposed bone.
Hundreds of fluttering insect wings created a crescendo of a hissing sizzle.
This lonely traveler, pioneer or scout, must have been dead for weeks, maybe even
months, such was the indication of the decay. Yet, it stood. It stood like a frozen ice
sculpture or a stone statue. It stood and gazed at Ryson with one lifeless eye. The other
had rotted completely away. Ryson could see into the empty socket, and he could look
upon the edges of the skull which surrounded it. The left side of the body apparently
decomposed faster than the other. Upon the same side as the vacant eye socket, most of
the flesh around the arm was missing. Much of the left forearm bone stood revealed. The
oozing flesh also hung loosely about the left hand.
In the other hand, which remained more or less intact, the fingers grasped a long thick
branch. Its tip had been shaved into a fine point. Though the spear-like weapon remained
firmly in the grip of this half-corpse, half-skeleton, it hung suspended in the air and
offered no explanation as to what allowed the corpse to remain upright. The dead sentinel
stood of its own accord, upon its own two decaying feet.
Ryson turned his disbelieving eyes back upon the face. He noticed the lips had rotted
clean away, revealing a ghastly grin. The sight was too much, and the delver forced
himself to turn away.
As he did, his ears caught the sound of unsteady footsteps. Ryson lifted his head, and
noted the flash of movement coming his way. With great speed and balance, he jumped
aside before understanding his plight. As the breeze of a slashing stick passed over his
shoulder, he refocused his attention, though he could not fathom his dilemma. It was the
spear of the corpse which slashed at him, and it remained in the same rotting hand.
"Godson!" The delver exclaimed in shock. He took retreating steps as the corpse
turned itself slowly. Ryson watched in horror and disbelief. The decaying body was
moving.
The corpse, however, defied logic, defied reality. It redirected itself back at Ryson and
again swung its shaft with malice. It voiced no sound. Only the crackling turn of exposed
bone echoed from its figure, and that was nearly drowned out by the hum of flies which
followed in a dancing swarm.
Ryson's speed again helped him escape the attack, but little helped his mind escape the
horror. Even as he stepped out of harm's way, he could not truly comprehend what he
was seeing. He moved out of instinct. It saved his life, but it did not restore the hold of
his senses.
As this living corpse turned and faced Ryson once more, the delver made every
attempt to rationalize his predicament. Perhaps this thing was not yet dead, perhaps by
some miracle it held onto the smallest spark of life. How else could it move toward him?
How else could it attack, unless it somehow remained alive? But this was impossible.
There was no blood flowing from the open wounds, there was no sign of breathing
through those sinister teeth. Nothing like this could live, yet still it moved.
Before the corpse could make another attempt at the delver's life, Ryson finally gained
greater control of his own movements. He began to step away and use the surrounding
trees as cover. He scurried about like a lost child while he assessed this preposterous
situation and questions steamrolled through his mind.
"Who are you?" he demanded with only a hint of panic in his voice.
The creature did not respond. It only circled about the trees hoping to get a clear shot
at its prey.
Ryson tried to maintain his composure. He checked his fear as he continued to move,
using his speed to his advantage. He kept a safe distance and at least two trees between
himself and the corpse as he watched the creature carefully. The more he watched the
more confused he became. With muscle and tissue missing from many parts of its body,
movement should have been impossible. But apparently, these facts held little meaning.
The creature continued its prodding, unyielding attack. It proved its ability to turn, move,
and fight even as rotting flesh dropped off its visible bones.
Unable to find any understanding in what he witnessed, Ryson made another attempt
to communicate with this atrocity.
"What are you? What are you doing?"
The creature made no sound. No words or even groans escaped its rotted mouth. It
offered no explanation for its existence, extended no reason for its attack.
Ryson inhaled deeply, hoping to ease his growing terror. His lungs filled with the
stench polluted air, and he coughed it out vigorously. His eyes watered as he fought off
the sickness which filled him.
In this moment, the corpse moved with a swiftness it previously hid. It darted from
behind one tree and found a position within two body lengths of its target. Nothing but
open space stood between it and the delver. It veered back before hurling its pointed shaft
with deadly intentions.
Ryson, still choking out the foul air, dropped to the ground instinctively. The spear
grazed his hair before gliding well out of reach. His hand flew to the top of his head to
check for injury. After brushing his fingers through his hair, he pulled his hand to the
front of his face. No blood.
Sprawled over the hard ground and protruding roots, Ryson remained vulnerable. He
tried to roll backwards away from the last known position of the corpse. He barely turned
at all when his motion was brought to a dead halt. His back hit a solid tree trunk with a
resounding thud. He gulped back a sting of pain. His eyes widened in panic as he realized
he was prone and backed against a tree, hardly an enviable position to avoid further
attack.
With a swirl of his head, he picked up sight of the corpse. It made no attempt to
retrieve its spear. Instead, it moved unerringly towards him, apparently ready to block
any attempt of escape.
The delver bit back his own terror. Using his great agility, he swung his legs about and
came to his knees. He was about to spring to his feet with the intention of climbing the
great tree behind him when the corpse unexpectedly leapt forward.
The creature actually flew across the air with a powerful bound. The impact was
heavy. It sent the delver back into the trunk. Upon contact, the corpse immediately took
hold of its quarry. Even as the two combatants deflected off the tree and went rolling, the
frightful attacker maintained a grip on its intended victim. The cloud of flies now
swarmed over both the corpse and the delver as the two became a united mass of flailing
limbs.
Ryson used the momentum of impact to continue rolling to an area of open ground.
He dug his knees, elbows and feet fiercely into the dirt and propelled himself with all his
strength. He pounded a free hand into the midsection of this thing and dropped a heavy
shoulder into its chest.
The energized carcass showed no sign of pain. It hung tightly, and it slowly moved its
grasp closer and closer to Ryson's throat.
The delver felt the pointed, hard bones of the creature's left hand. They dug first into
his side and then into his chest. His mind ached with panic. He whipped his own hand to
his belt. His fingers opened his pouch deftly and reached inside. He pulled his dagger free
and jabbed it into the center of the corpse. He pushed forward with all his might until
every inch of the blade buried itself deep within the rotting skin.
The creature had no reaction. It did not slow its own deliberate assault. Within a
heartbeat, it had its putrid hands about the delver's neck. The hard finger bones began to
clamp down.
"No!" Ryson screamed before the thing could crush his windpipe. He released his hold
on his dagger. With unbridled fury, stoked by the will to live, Ryson threw his arms
upward. His forearms crashed into the wrists of the corpse. Such was the force of contact,
that the boney left wrist snapped, and the creature's hand went sailing into the brush. The
hold was broken, and Ryson scampered off to a safe distance.
The corpse showed no sign of distress over losing its hand. It also showed no sign of
tiring. It moved to its feet, brought its focus back upon Ryson, and again, it moved
forward.
The delver's shoulders drooped in disbelief. Mental fatigue, more then physical
weariness, hung upon him even as he moved carefully away. As he waved the buzzing
insects from his face, he considered turning and running for safety. Even as tired as he
was, he believed he could quickly outdistance this thing. He condemned the thought, for
it offered no answers, but it appeared his only option. With no other weapon, he had no
way of stopping it.
Just as he made his decision, a call from the tree above him held him in place.
"Hold your ground!" an order called out.
Unthinkingly, Ryson's gaze flew upward.
The corpse ignored the call and saw yet another opportunity to reach its prey. It again
moved with great speed and an extended right arm.
Before the arm could reach its target, another form dropped into the fray. A strange
man landed upon the ground directly between Ryson and the attacking creature. He was
slightly taller than Ryson, but not by much. He was also thinner, yet his muscles were
more defined.
With grace and speed that even a delver might envy, the man drew a gleaming sword.
The blade was as long as his arm, but only as wide as two of his fingers pressed together.
It gleamed with razor sharpness on both its edges. With one quick stroke, the blade sliced
through the air as well as the upper portion of the creature's right arm.
The arm fell to the ground, and for the first time, the corpse paused in its attack. It
stood motionless. It stared at the lifeless arm upon the ground as if contemplating its
meaning. The flies also faced indecision. They buzzed back and forth from the amputated
arm to the main body of the corpse.
The newly arrived stranger did not show any such hesitation. He leaned to one side,
and with a great sweeping motion, sent his blade flashing towards the legs of the cadaver.
The stranger stepped into his swing, doubling the force of the blow as it struck at the
knees. Both legs snapped in half and the corpse folded to the ground.
Ryson stared at the crumpled figure, his gaze fixed upon the heap of bones and rotting
flesh. Just as he exhaled with relief, he thought he noticed a light blue glow fizzle about
the remains. No further movement occurred, other than the swarming flies which now
appeared content to buzz about the motionless remains. The delver found his voice to
mumble a confused question.
"Is it dead?"
"It has been dead for many days," the stranger said sadly, revealing some greater
concern.
"What are you talking about?!" The delver's eyes widened as he turned his stare upon
the stranger. His outlandish confrontation still fresh in his mind, Ryson failed to question
the appearance of the newcomer, and instead, his thoughts remained fixed upon the
corpse. Confusion swirled in his brain.
"How can you say that?" Ryson gasped. "If it were dead, how could it move? You
must have seen it for yourself. Didn't you see it trying to attack me?"
"That I did." The stranger looked thoughtfully at Ryson. "To perhaps all our dismay, it
seems the dead can now be brought back to a sense of life. I despise calling it that, for it
is not life at all. Animation. Forced energy. Nothing more."
The delver's bewilderment only increased.
"What?" It was all he could manage to blurt out.
"Magic, I'm afraid," the stranger said distressfully. "It only proves what I already
know. The sphere must be free. That is the only answer. It must be. It would explain all
that has happened. I could not fathom as to who has gained possession. The thought is too
difficult to bear."
The delver found only puzzles in the words of the stranger. He clasped his hands in
great torment. His voice held the tone of unreasoning bewilderment. "What… what are
you talking about? I don't understand what's going on. None of this makes any sense!"
"It makes all too much sense. Try to calm yourself and I will try to explain. This will
not be easy to accept. It's not easy for me, yet it does not surprise me. You were attacked
by the undead, sprung from magic long absent from Uton. I would guess that loosened
energies are sailing in every direction even as we talk. The remnants of a spell captured
long ago, now released, must have found this half-rotten corpse of some wayward
traveler. The magic found its home and animated the body. You were simply unfortunate
enough to come across its path."
Ryson shook his head vehemently. "That's not possible. What you're saying is simply
not possible."
"Isn't it?" the stranger said firmly. "Speak of possibilities and explain to me what you
yourself have witnessed. Perhaps many days ago it was not possible, but it appears that
this is no longer the case. I tell you the magic is free, and we now face everything that
goes with it."
Ryson was aghast. "So you're telling me the dead will start rising all over?"
"No. There will be others, that is for sure, but the magic will take different paths. It
depends on many things. Unfortunately, I lack information."
Ryson stared back at the now lifeless heap of rotting flesh. Fatigue, confusion, even
despair, crashed upon his every thought. He fought to seize shreds of logic, answers to
this unthinkable puzzle. He found nothing but greater turmoil.
"You are human?" the stranger's voice questioned firmly. There was little sign of
compassion for the delver's confusion.
Ryson finally forced his gaze completely from the broken mass which previously
hoped to kill him. He focused upon the face of the man that came to his aid and now
stood before him. The stranger had brown, thin hair that hung straight down and clung to
his head and neck. It covered his ears fully before ending at the tops of his shoulders.
Over which, he wore a heavy wooden long bow and a quiver of arrows. His face looked
as ordinary as anyone's, except for the nose which appeared small and slightly pointed.
"I'm a delver," Ryson finally answered. The question brought some sense of hard
reality. Stating a simple fact seemed to reassure his troubled thoughts. Finding
momentary sanctuary in such feelings, he focused upon the question. "Why do you ask?"
The stranger revealed a hint of hopefulness at Ryson's response.
"Truly? You are a delver? Full-bred?"
"Yes. Again, why do you ask?"
The stranger ignored the question as he reflected upon his own thoughts. "A delver,"
he mumbled to himself. "Perhaps a blessing. Difficult to say without more information."
"What are you talking about?" Ryson demanded. His confusion grew into annoyance.
"First, you tell me about the undead and strange magic. Then, you say there might be
more. You ask if I'm human, but you stand there talking to yourself when you find out
I'm a delver. Are we in danger or not?"
"Relax. You are safe for now. Perhaps safer than I. I asked if you were human because
I watched you fight. You moved with great speed and agility. I could not believe you
were an ordinary human. I thought you might be half-bred. Although they are scarce,
they do exist. I myself have never seen one."
"You mean half-delver, half-human? You haven't seen one before? I've met
hundreds."
"No. I mean half-human, half-elf."
“Elf?!”
Again, Ryson Acumen's eyes widened in disbelief. He now stared angrily at the brown
haired man. The word burned in his mind. This was too much. His despair blossomed
into near rage. Was it not enough for him to have dealt with the atrocity of the undead?
Would he now have to listen to this stranger cast stories about ancient legends? The
explanation of magic animating this pile of rotted flesh and bones was enough to stir his
anger, but this, this was too much to handle. Rage took hold of his thoughts, a burning
spark ignited into a roaring flame and Ryson snapped with a harangue directed at the
stranger's apparent disregard for ancient folklore.
"That's enough! I’m not going to listen to anymore of this. I don’t know who you are,
but that’s enough. You might think I'm fool enough to believe your story about magic,
but I won't stand here and listen to anymore! You want to try and make a fool of me by
talking about magic, well that's fine, but when you talk about elves you're talking about
things you probably don't even understand. You're speaking about legends, myths I may
not believe but there are others who do. Who in the name of Godson are you to make
light of such things?!"
At first the interloper watched in wide-eyed wonder at the delver's outburst. He was
certainly not prepared for such a tongue-lashing and he gaped at Ryson for the first few
lines of the angry lecture. Finally, he made an attempt to explain. "Please hold your
anger. I assure you I am not making light of the legends. Nothing could be further from
my mind."
Ryson's anger barely subsided. "Then, why are you questioning me about elves?" he
demanded in a strained tone.
For the first time the stranger showed a gleam of compassion for the delver. He spoke
softer and with greater warmth. He sheathed his sword and put his arms behind his back.
"First allow me to introduce myself. I am Lief Woodson. I am happy to see you defend
what you call myths so vigorously, but I assure you, they are not myths. The teachings to
which you refer are based on a reality of long ago. It is a reality, however, which all may
have to accept once more."
Ryson finally checked his anger. While the words of the stranger held no more clarity
than before, at least his own outburst released the strain of his encounter with the living
dead. "I still don't know what you're talking about, but I want to make one thing clear. I
know about the legends. I was taught long ago to respect them. That means if you're
going to try and make up lies, I won't stand here listening to you. I'll go my own way and
find out what I can on my own. I'm not ungrateful to you for saving me, but your words
are disrespectful. Not to me, but to others."
Lief Woodson smiled broadly. He even allowed himself to laugh lightly, but only for a
scant moment. "You must indeed be a delver, for no human would treat the legends with
such respect. Forgive me for laughing, I do not laugh at you. I have witnessed many
disconcerting things these past few days. To listen to you sparks a hope deep within me.
But let me assure you, I do not abuse those things which you call myths. They are,
however, not myths. They were, are, and always shall be reality. I am part of the legends
themselves. As you are purebred delver, I am full-bred elf."
Lief pulled his hair back and away from the sides of his head and he exposed his ears
for Ryson to witness the pointed tips.
"It is the one true physical characteristic which parts us clearly from the humans," Lief
said. "The other differences are not so visible."
"You're an elf!" Ryson exclaimed.
The delver stared at each pointed ear until Lief released his hair and covered them
once more. The delver dropped his gaze to the ground and brought his own hand to his
forehead.
"What am I saying?" the delver moaned. "How was I to know that elves exist? They're
not supposed to exist. And the dead aren't supposed to rise. And magic is something for
sideshow illusionists and fairy tales. What's happening here?! What's happening to me?!"
Lief spoke slowly and reassuringly to the delver. "I will tell you all I can. I will tell
you of things you may refuse to believe, for I will almost assuredly destroy your previous
outlook of this world."
"I don't know what to believe anymore," Ryson groaned with all honesty. His thoughts
were a whirlwind. Logic failed to bring light to his scattered mind. He could not erase the
image of the walking dead, as he could not avoid casting disbelieving glance after
disbelieving glance at his new found companion. The elf's words were no more than a
buzzing in his ear which he strained to hear.
"I don't know exactly how much you know of the legends," Lief Woodson continued.
"Perhaps what you have heard is only the barest reference to the past."
Ryson kicked at the ground slowly. Seizing upon something he could answer with
certainty, he spoke of his own knowledge on the subject. "I've probably heard more than
most," he admitted. "My parents wanted me to be acquainted with the legends, not so I
would believe them, but so I would be aware of what others thought. I guess it's part of
being a delver."
"You may wish to thank your parents for that some day. If it is true, you may well be
better prepared for what I see as inevitable."
The delver brought his focus back to the face of the elf. He stared deeply into Lief's
eyes. "Tell me the truth, what's happening? What in the name of Godson is going on?"
Lief attempted to show even greater compassion. His own distress, however, became
growingly apparent.
"I believe I know," the elf stated, "though others in my camp continue to reject the
idea. The existence of the undead, however, confirms my theory. The only question
which remains is how it has occurred. The Sphere of Ingar is free from its containment. It
is the only answer."
"Ingar's sphere?"
"You know of it?"
"Of course I know of it,” Ryson replied. “It's the most important of the legends. It’s
supposed to explain how the world rid itself of magic and the dark creatures."
Lief nodded to the pile of broken bones and flesh before them. "As you saw for
yourself, the dark creatures have returned. Magic is also loose in the land. The blue glow
which left the corpse, that was spell remnants. Magic. Perhaps, dark sorcery. Nothing else
can explain it."
"But the Sphere of Ingar? Come on! Do you really expect me to believe that?"
"I expect nothing," Lief frowned
"But you're telling me these things. You must be hoping to convince me of them."
"What would you have me do?" the elf questioned with a tone of harshness. "You
have asked me what is happening. I am telling you what I believe to be true. Should I tell
you that I am not an elf and that this corpse did not come to life? What is it you expect of
me?"
Ryson sighed heavily. He did not know what he wanted. If these were the true answers
to his questions, they left only more puzzles. "You have to forgive me, but I need a
moment to sort this out. What you're saying defies all logic."
"I understand," the elf grumbled grudgingly. "Take a moment to gather yourself, but
be warned, I can not totally disregard time. I must return to my camp to warn them of
this. The elves are in great peril."
Ryson did not ask for further explanation on that point. Enough confusing,
contradictory thoughts bounded through his mind as it was. The last thing he needed was
to hear of more outlandish tales. Still, if Lief was right, he had to consider the outlandish;
the myths and the legends. His mind rolled back to the tales he learned as a child.
The image of his mother came firmly into mind. He could see her in the kitchen at the
holidays. He remembered being young and eager to learn everything. He listened with
great intent as she began her teachings of the old stories. He could almost smell the
baking of bread and hear her reassuring voice as he reflected upon elf tales and the legend
of Ingar.
His mind then shifted to an image of his father who taught him how to use his
abilities. In the forests and the mountains, he showed him how to leap and climb. He also
told him everything he knew from ancient lore, such as the Book of Godson. He spoke of
massive creatures called cliff behemoths that lived solely upon these words.
Cliff behemoths! Could such creatures rally exist?! Yet, here stood an elf before him.
If an elf existed, why not a cliff behemoth? Why not an algor for that matter? Tailless
lizards could be no more difficult to believe than the dead walking and raising arms
against him. What was the explanation that caused this? Magic? Real magic, not fake
tricks? The Sphere of Ingar was supposed to contain all the magical energy. But
according to the legends, the sphere was entombed long ago. If there is indeed such a
talisman, then there must also be sorcerers and wizards.
Such disquieting thoughts continued to cloud his mind. He walked about, circling the
pines nearby. He mumbled to himself over and over. This was too much for any one man
to accept, even a delver. However, he could not deny the simple facts before him. A
corpse attacked him. Something which should have been unable to even move had shown
the ability to carry and throw a crude spear, to chase and even choke him. There also
stood before him what looked like, for all intents and purposes, an elf. Lief Woodson
appeared honest and forthright, and had pointed ears.
Ryson eventually found himself standing once more by the side of the elf. He also
found himself retracing the same thoughts over and over again. Finally, he spoke with
forced determination.
"I don't know what's going on. That's the unfortunate answer. I have no idea
whatsoever. Either I'm mad or you're right. Since I don't want to believe I've lost my
mind, I have to hope to find another answer. You may be right, but it's a little much for
me to just accept. Maybe it's best for me to be just what I am, a delver, and look for the
answers."
Lief nodded in pensive approval. "I hope that also means that you may be willing to
assist me. I have said before I lack knowledge. A delver's assistance would help me
greatly. It will also serve your own purposes for it will bring you greater information.
You will see things you never expected to see in your life."
"That's already happened. I look at you now. I never expected to see an elf, let alone
talk to one."
Lief allowed himself to laugh once more. He spoke with a smile through his
momentary chuckle. "I suppose that means you really believe I am an elf. I'm glad I will
not have to argue that point any further. Actually, I doubt you really know what to make
of me at all. You should have seen your face when I showed you my ears."
"It's just that I never expected this," Ryson admitted while revealing a hint of
embarrassment.
"It will be new to us all," Lief stated. "The last contact between elf and human
occurred so long ago that I can't even remember. It looks as if now we have no choice.
Elves will have to come out into the open once more. But enough of that. Will you assist
me?"
Ryson considered the request carefully. “Assist you? How?”
“As I have said, I need information. I need to know what you’ve seen and heard, and
why you are here.” The elf stated this pointedly.
"I'll do what I can."
"And I will help you. I will prepare you for what I expect to find. By the way, if we
are to assist one another, what shall I call you?"
The delver was taken slightly aback. He never could have expected he would be
introducing himself to a being he thought existed only in fantasy. "I'm sorry. I'm Ryson
Acumen. I should have told you much sooner.
"It's more than understandable. Think nothing more of it. Now, we have important
business to attend to." Lief's congeniality faded into dark seriousness. Bleakness stretched
across his face, his words dropped from his mouth like dead anchors. "I must ask you
now what you were doing in this part of the forest. It is not a passage and there are no
towns about. Are the humans thinking again of expanding their territory? Were you
investigating the lands for them?"
"No, not really." Ryson struggled to maintain an even flow of thought. So much had
occurred in recent moments; he found it difficult to latch upon those events which
brought him to Dark Spruce in the first place. Laboriously, he summed up the reasons for
his exploration. "It was the quake, a tremor that rolled through Connel a few days ago."
In truth, he wasn't sure how long ago the tremor disturbed the grounds surrounding
Connel. He continued as if trying to pull thoughts one by one from his head. "I wanted to
see what effect it had on the land. The town council also wanted an exploration. At first, I
was sent to inspect damage to some neighboring towns. I've completed that. I left
Pinesway this morning to follow the tremor, and that led me into the forest. I'm still
trying to see how things have changed. I'm also seeking the origin of the quake."
Lief considered the explanation with apparent confusion. "I do not mean to question
you, but when I first spotted you, you were traveling south. You were not following the
path of the tremor. That leads to the west"
"Yes. I have to admit I lost my focus," Ryson responded with greater certainty. The
reason for his change in direction was the undead attacker, and that memory could not be
washed from his mind. "I noticed a smell. It was so strange and new, it pulled at me.
Sometimes that's the price of being a delver. We never know how our instincts will guide
us. It guided me to this." He nodded to the corpse. The sight now revolted him. "But it is
my intention to return to the path of the tremor. By the way, were you aware of the
quake?"
The question brought further anguish to Lief's demeanor, graveness painted his face
even darker. He looked to the west, as if he could see through the thicket of trees which
surrounded them. "I'm all too aware of the disturbance which passed. It is that same
tremor which preceded incidents of great magnitude. It is why I have the fears which I
do."
"You mean about the Sphere of Ingar?"
"Indeed. While the quake did little damage to our camp, I feel it signified something
more. Within hours of the tremor, my people experienced many amazing things. Older
elves found themselves rejuvenated with youthful vitality. Younger elves showed an
uncanny ability to foretell events and see into the minds of others. As the day passed, it
soon became apparent that the members of my camp were becoming filled with a power
long since vanished. Many took it as a blessing, a sign that the elves would return to their
place in the land's order. I did not look at it in such a favorable light.
"My fears truly became heightened when a very gifted youngster turned invisible at
his own will. At that point, I spoke up. I declared that something was very wrong, that the
only answer was that the magic long trapped in the sphere was now being released. With
no surprise, my announcement created great fear. There were those that refused to believe
me. They wished to believe it a blessing and not a curse. Yet, within a day, the more
sensitive of my people found themselves feeling ill at ease.
"Again, I spoke up and again I was refuted. This time, however, there were others
which spoke with me. Even my harshest critics could not ignore the fact that magic was
again free in the air. They persisted, however, that the magic was not from the sphere.
They concluded that the magic was freed from the land itself, freed by the quake."
"But you don't think so, do you?" Ryson asked inquisitively. Finally, he found a
moment of freedom from the anguish in his mind. The chance to ask questions, to listen
and learn of such things as elves and their conversations, to hear of things as foreign as
Elf camps; such things invoked his delver instincts.
Lief shook his head sternly. "I did not then, and I certainly do not now. The dead has
been raised. That is not a blessing. This is serious magic, magic that could only have been
held by the sphere. Magic caught within the land would not hold the ability or the
intention to create undead warriors. If it was not from the sphere, it would be pure and
hold no such order. No, I'm afraid the magic must have been corrupted by a powerful
sorcerer long ago. All of that energy was captured in the sphere."
"It sounds as if you're convinced," Ryson noted. "I don't know enough to argue the
point. I know what I've seen and it does defy all sanity. You're obviously out in the forest
for a reason, I assume to help support your theory. That being the case, what is it you
want to do?"
"We must travel to Sanctum Mountain. We must learn what we can."
Ryson contemplated the proposal. His face revealed slight hesitancy.
"What troubles you, delver?" Lief asked.
Ryson grimaced. "I must admit that I'm not just following the quake for myself. I
promised Reader Matthew I would include him on what I found. If I agree to go with you
to Sanctum, it means I'm giving up. I'd rather not do that."
"Who is this Reader Matthew?" Lief requested, perturbed by the thought that
something might detract from him obtaining the help of the delver.
"I guess you would call him the spiritual leader for the Church of Godson at Connel,"
Ryson responded simply.
Surprise filled the elf. He reared his head back as he could not refrain from blurting
out a hasty question. "A reader of Godson is concerned about the quake? Did he tell you
why?"
"He did. He spoke of the prophesies of Godson. Apparently, they were translated with
great accuracy for them by some interpreter. But this tremor wasn't mentioned by the
translator. Matthew found this difficult to accept. He wants to know more of the quake,
where it came from and what it's done to the land."
"So their prophecies include nothing about the quake, either?" The fact appeared to
strike Lief more personally than it should have, almost as if the translated prophecies
meant as much to him as they did to Matthew and his followers.
The elf's reaction was not lost upon the delver, and Ryson watched with greater
interest as he made his simple response. "Apparently not."
Lief shook his head in tired frustration. "Yet, another factor which now weighs upon
me. How do I deal with this? Elflore says nothing about this and now I find the Book of
Godson is also lacking. Fire upon the prophecies for not warning us of this. Must we face
this without the slightest reference of what might be? How are we to act, what should we
do?"
Ryson remained quiet for long moments. He longed to ask about elflore and how it
impacted Lief's theories. But the elf remained in deep deliberation, and Ryson let his
companion weigh this new information without interruption. He would find another time
to ask about such things.
The elf grimaced with uncertainty before turning his attention back to the delver.
When he spoke, he said nothing of elflore or the Book of Godson.
"So, the reader wishes you to send word as to what you find. I think we can continue
to accommodate that. I do not believe it will be a conflict at all. He wishes you to follow
the path of the quake. If I am not mistaken, the path will lead us directly to Sanctum
Mountain. I would also go as far as to guess that the reader would also be quite interested
in the fate of the sphere. I believe the Book of Godson refers to the sphere and its
history."
"I'm not sure about that. While I've been told the legends, I've never received
teachings direct from the book. I'm not sure which story comes from where. I would have
to agree, though, that Matthew would be interested in knowing of the sphere, if indeed
such a sphere exists."
"Free yourself from your doubts, delver. I understand them, but they will only make
things more difficult for you. There is a sphere and I am now quite sure that it is
responsible for the happenings of the past few days. You must expect to see things you
would previously never have believed possible. Very simply, the magic is free. How or
why it's free is of great concern to me. It is what we must determine. Remember the
legends. Keep them in your mind, hold to them, and believe them. They will help you,
and perhaps keep you from madness. They may also save your life."
The elf paused and nodded to the decaying remains upon the ground before them.
"You've already faced the undead today. There is no telling what else awaits us."
Ryson looked upon the now lifeless corpse for the last time, a stark reminder of the
madness he might face. He noticed the handle of his dagger protruding out of its chest.
He fought off his own repugnance and bent over to retrieve it. He wiped the blade on the
ground several times. He examined it carefully before returning it to his belt, making sure
not the slightest stain remained.
"Speaking of such," Ryson spoke with an edge, "what happens if we face another one
of these? What do I have to do to stop it?"
"You must remember it is an undead warrior. It is no longer a living thing. It is a
lifeless hulk, animated by dark magic. You can't expect to kill it by thrusting a blade into
its heart. It won't be effective, for the heart is no longer important. It also won't feel pain.
And it won't feel regret or remorse at attacking. There are only two ways to stop such a
creature. You must remove the magic which gives it life, or inflict enough damage so that
it is no longer a threat. It takes powerful spells to forcibly remove the energy, so unless
you are willing to become a sorcerer, that option is not open to you. That leaves the
second. That is what I did. The undead are strong, but their bodies are not very resilient.
Decay will do that. If you damage the body to a point where it can no longer hurt you, the
magic will leave of its own accord. When I struck the legs of the creature, it was no
longer capable of movement. The energy could no longer force the corpse to attack, so it
left."
"I see. But I'm not equipped for such a battle. This knife is all I carry."
"Then, you might consider altering that decision. Your only other option is to flee.
Don't worry about that now. We go to Sanctum Mountain together. If we face the undead,
I shall dispatch it, unless they're in great numbers."
"Then I'll rely upon you as well as my own senses," Ryson acknowledged. "Hopefully,
I can warn us of another such monster."
"Warnings are always advantageous. Now let us move on. I would, though, make one
request. Let us move through the trees. Passing from branch to branch, crossing the forest
above the ground, it is how I travel."
"That will slow me down," Ryson admitted.
"I know, but it will allow me to keep pace with you. It is the quickest way for me. It is
a fairly short trip to Sanctum. We might reach its base before nightfall, but if you are as
gifted as the stories reveal about delvers, there is no way I can match your speed upon the
ground. I have seen you move as you battled the undead; of this I'm already sure."
"If you think it’s best."
"It is indeed. The forest will take us to the edge of Sanctum. At that point we can
examine the area and adjust our travel. For now, simply follow your instincts. Return
your attention to the quake and its path. It will lead us westward and that is where I wish
to go. Follow it as you see fit. I believe it will lead us to the mountain. If you sense
anything else which calls for your attention, please inform me."
"Certainly," Ryson agreed without hesitation. Millions of questions assaulted him,
questions without answers. He would not find those answers by remaining here; they
waited elsewhere, perhaps within Sanctum Mountain. He could not deny what had
happened to him, could not shove it into the recesses of his mind. As a delver, he needed
answers, no matter how incredible. He took to the journey with no less hesitation then
when he first left Connel. Without further word, the two nimble figures grasped branches
overhead and disappeared into the trees.

The elf and the delver moved westward. They scaled the trees with ease. They leapt
from branch to branch, swung from tree to tree, and trotted deep within the pine needles
and leaves. Even among the thickest grove of cedars, their pace far exceeded the normal
walking speed of a human.
As they carried themselves closer to the sky, their path earned them greater sunlight.
The trees themselves were full of life. Early season cherries were already ripening and
berries on taller bushes waited within arm’s reach. The two travelers paused on several
occasions to re-energize with the beckoning gifts.
As they moved about the sturdy branches, small animals appeared to enjoy their
company. Birds and squirrels danced along with them. Every now and then, the delver
whistled out a bird call or a chirp to a nearby chipmunk. He would smile broadly with
every musical response. The sunlight, the animals, the green of Dark Spruce; all served to
lift the gloom from the delver. He found the excursion invigorating, and he found his
natural abilities more than capable in handling the task. He ducked in and out of the trees
with amazing grace and balance. He slipped through dense clusters of branches by
navigating through twisting passages. While he could have moved much faster upon the
ground, he was satisfied with their pace. He was also pleased to hone his climbing skills.
Indeed, he made a mental note to travel this way more often. If nothing else, it kept many
of his abilities sharp.
The elf moved with similar ease, but he failed to show the same eager enthusiasm.
This was no new or unique experience. Traveling within the trees was as normal to him
as breathing. It was how all woodland elves traveled. There was never a need to cut a
path through dense underbrush as long as the trees formed a forest. Thick branches cast
the framework for both their paths and their bridges. There was not a stream in Dark
Spruce that could not be crossed by leaping from one tree to another. As easily as
squirrels crossed great distances while never placing a single step upon the ground, the
elves moved in similar fashion, and Lief was please with the speed in which they crossed
Dark Spruce.
With each step, from one tree to the next, the delver became more engrossed with
following the path of the quake. Traveling upon the branches became routine. His
attention focused squarely upon the quest, and his instincts took greater control of his
movements.
The elf followed behind the delver. He allowed Ryson to choose the direction and
path. Only occasionally would he lift his head to get his own bearings. To both his
distress and satisfaction, he noted their westward movement, movement that carried them
in the general direction of Sanctum.
The delver made his decisions based on the signs of the ground below. Once again, his
senses focused upon the trail of the tremor. He peered downward often to assess the mark
of the quake. Disheveled ground and uplifted roots gave clear indications of the path. The
signs of damage became clearer and more extensive with every step. In places, the soil
appeared freshly turned. Actual breaks in the ground, cracks and crevices, appeared more
regularly. He also noted greater damage to the trees. He found more than one completely
uprooted. Tree branches were covered with dust and debris, fallout from the upheaval of
the quake.
As they moved onward, they took fewer and fewer breaks. Ryson rushed forward, the
trail beckoning him with greater influence. Even as the path became clearer, something in
the distance called out to his instincts, something akin to a faint echo. He could not seize
the true fabric of this call, but he was certain something of great importance waited for
his discovery. He wondered if it would hold the answer to his questions or only create
more mysteries, but whatever the case, he wished to find it. Such was the strength of his
pursuit that he nearly forgot about his companion.
The elf kept pace, although it proved to be a struggle. As accustomed as Lief was to
this form of travel, he was not prepared for the great speed of a delver. He called upon his
own natural skills to keep up. He considered calling out to Ryson to slow his travel, but
changed his mind as he saw the outline of Sanctum Mountain.
It was just as he thought, even as he feared. Following the path of the tremor
continued to lead them to his personal objective, the site of entombment for the Sphere of
Ingar. Even as he mulled the seriousness of this sign in his mind, he still could not guess
what the final outcome might be. Again, he cursed the lore and the prophecies. Not a
word about this existed, not a prophecy, not even a warning. Nothing.
The elf gritted his teeth as he smelled the late afternoon air. It was heavy with magic,
power that should not exist. Such energy was captured long ago, captured by the sphere,
which was in turn buried deep within Sanctum. Yet, the magic was strongly prevalent
here. More proof that the sphere's centuries long entombment had ended. Powerful
thoughts as well as fears filled the elf with despair and confusion. Lief became so
consumed, he almost passed by the delver.
Ryson had come to a complete halt within a broad leafed maple. He stood rigid upon a
heavy bough. He looked off to the north. His nose sniffed the air as he remained
motionless. Only the elf's continued movement caused him to react. As Lief stepped
forward to Ryson's side, the delver put out an arm and grabbed the elf's shoulder. He
made it very clear that he wanted silence.
The elf complied completely. He crouched slightly but then remained perfectly still.
He peered in the same northern direction. His sharp eyes caught glimpses of movement
within a shout's distance away, but branches, leaves and pine needles blocked clear sight
of the ground based commotion.
Ryson moved his head near the elf's ear.
"What do you see?" he whispered.
Lief stared for a moment more. He answered in a whispered but sturdy voice. "My
vision is blocked, but I make out the movement of at least three. There may be more out
of sight. I have caught the glint of steel in the sunlight, normally a sign of weapons or
armor, but I can not say what they carry. I also can not determine who they are. It is hard
to say for sure, but they appear short in size. They might be nothing more than human
children, though I can not explain the existence of steel if they were. Perhaps, they are
soldiers that are crouching."
Ryson shook his head. "I don't think so. What do you hear?"
The elf brushed the hair away from the side of his head, again revealing one pointed
ear. He listened for a moment and grimaced before explaining. "It is strange, a grumbling
of strangely pitched voices. It reverberates with a strange echo, as if they were talking in
a cave. I can not make out any words."
Ryson did not respond. He sniffed the air again, and then put a hand to his chin. He
crouched deep in thought as he considered their findings.
The elf turned his gaze upon the delver. "You are confused. What's wrong?"
"The smell," Ryson acknowledged. "It's strange to me."
"It was the smell that made you uncover the undead, was it not?"
"Yes, but this is different. This isn't decay. This is something totally new."
The elf took a moment to cast a glance at the outline of Sanctum. "If I am right about
the sphere," he whispered, "and now I believe I am certain, there is magic in the air. That
may be what affects your smell."
"The scent is coming from that group," Ryson insisted. "They're the source."
"More evil," Lief mumbled as he turned his attention back to the unidentified
strangers. "I see another. I'm sure there are now at least four. They wear thick breast
plates. I believe they are warriors of some type."
"Perhaps, but they're not human," Ryson said with great certainty.
"They may be dwarves," Lief interjected. "That would explain their apparent size. It
would explain the chest plates, although they only wear armor in times of battle. I wish I
could see their faces."
Ryson blinked at the thought. "Dwarves?"
The elf quickly reminded Ryson of the situation he faced. "Remember your legends,
delver. You see before you an elf, and you have faced the undead. Take my word for
what it is. Dwarves still live in this world."
"I guess it's possible."
"But still confusing," Lief added. "Dwarves do not make a practice of mulling about in
the woods, even close to a mountain. They live in the comfort and security of tunnel
caves. Daylight is not kind to their eyes. I can not understand why they might be here."
The elf paused a second before offering his own theory. "Perhaps they are also aware
of the freed magic. They might be here to inspect the tomb. It would explain much."
Ryson made it clear he wanted more than just a plausible theory before they
disregarded this encounter. "How can we be sure?"
Lief responded with quick certainty. "We need to get a better look at them. Dwarves
are unmistakable in feature. All are stout and powerful. They are shorter than the average
human. Their faces are much like yours or mine except stern, as if chiseled. The men
wear long beards, and most let their hair grow full and long. They wield axe, mace, and
broadsword."
"Excellent," Ryson exclaimed. "Let me go and have a look at them. I'll come back and
tell you if your description fits."
Lief's voice grew stern and demanding. "You do not intend to go alone? I shall
accompany you!"
The delver shook his head. "No. I'll move easier if I only have to worry about myself."
"But that is not all you have to worry about," Lief responded adamantly. "You face
many things you know little of. I can not let you blunder mindlessly into such a thing."
"I have no intention of blundering into anything. I fully intend on being as careful as
possible."
"You will take greater care if I am with you."
"I don't think so," Ryson whispered. "This is what I do. You've seen me move, do you
really question my abilities? I can investigate without being seen or heard, but to do it
well, I have to move alone."
Lief considered what he had already learned watching the delver upon this day. He
could not deny the skills which were inherently the delver's. He accepted the situation,
although reluctantly. "Very well, but take heed. Dwarves are known to be dangerous.
They are strong and deadly with their weapons. If you arouse them, they might attack. If
you are spotted, I suggest you flee. It is your best chance. I can tell you truly, no dwarf
could match you in speed and agility."
"I'll remember that. I'll be back in a moment. This shouldn't take very long."
Ryson looked about quickly before leaping to a higher branch. He continued climbing,
barely making a sound or even disturbing a single leaf. As soon he was several lengths
above his previous position, he moved toward the unidentified persons. High in the trees,
the delver used the cover of the branches and leaves to his every advantage. He became
less a shadow and more a part of the trees themselves. He made his way to a better
vantage point before dropping down several branches. He quickly obtained a position
which allowed a clear view of the group below. He pulled the spyscope from his pouch
and gained close view of his quarry. He found the spectacle most surprising. The
characteristics he spotted did not come close to matching the description given by the elf.
Except for the short stature, these creatures looked nothing like dwarves.
Closer to the group, he counted seven in all. They were odd looking, actually
disgusting creatures. They had round, balloon-like heads, with a grayish tint, maybe even
a hint of purple. Thick heavy skin, apparently layers and layers, swelled around the
cheeks and eyes. It made their faces look puffy and swollen. Thin lips outlined very wide
mouths. Within these mouths, Ryson saw long disorganized rows of small, square teeth.
Thin wisps of wiry gray and black hair dotted their round heads. Their noses were
different and unique from creature to creature. Some had short, round noses. Others had
long pointed ones. One had no true nose at all, only two nostril openings at the center of
its face.
As for their weapons, they carried small crossbows draped over their backs, and they
wore short swords at their sides. They wore thick plates covering their chests. It was their
only protection.
Ryson listened as the creatures continued to mull about the ground. They spoke in
muffled grumblings. The delver could not decipher a single word.
Before leaving his position, he peered about looking for any stragglers or guards. With
careful eyes, the delver quickly spotted a single creature hiding up in the branches over
the others. This guard cradled a crossbow in its arms.
Secure that he was aware of all the potential hazards, Ryson silently returned to Lief's
side. He whispered his report hoping to gain comprehension from the elf's viewpoint.
"Goblins!" the elf whispered with a heavy sign. "As if I needed another sign to accept
the dark truth of what we now face."
"Goblins?" Ryson exclaimed in a weary voice, yet another surprise, another
unexpected twist to this mind-boggling experience.
"Yes, goblins. It's further proof that the sphere is free from imprisonment. Goblins can
not survive without magic, not in this plane of existence. They are creatures of the dark.
Some say they come up from the underground with the help of magic, but the dwarves
never agreed with that theory. They contend they fall from trees, like overripe fruit. I
don't know where they come from, but I know the last was seen long ago. They did not
last long after the war over the sphere. I have never seen one. My father fought one of the
last groups in a suicide battle, but that was long, long ago. Apparently, they are back."
"So what do we do?"
The elf quickly considered the available options. "How many did you see?"
"There are seven on the ground. There is one in the tree over their heads. I assume he
is there to protect the others. He has his crossbow drawn and loaded."
"Puny numbers," Lief said indignantly. "The true threat of the goblin lies in their
numbers. I have heard stories of them attacking in hundreds of thousands. They darken
the land and fill the sky with their arrows. I also know that they are not the bravest of
creatures. Such a small group, they must be very worried. A single guard in a tree will
give them little protection."
Ryson recalled other factors and revealed them to Lief. "They mumbled a lot, but I
couldn't understand what they were saying. They seemed to be looking around, almost as
if they were waiting for something."
"They are probably waiting for their numbers to swell, hiding in the trees until they
feel more comfortable with the size of their group. We won't give them a chance."
Ryson noted the belligerent tone in the elf's voice. "What do you intend to do?" he
asked with a raised eyebrow.
"I intend to break up their party before they grow into a threatening herd," Lief
answered with a cold chill tainting his words. He could not hide his animosity, and did
not wish to. "I seek answers. These cretins may hold such answers. It is a perfect
opportunity. Doubtless, they are unaware of our presence. We can take them with little
difficulty. I doubt they will do little more than run."
As if there was to be no discussion, Lief gave his orders. "I want you to approach the
guard. Knock him to the ground. When you strike, I will move from lower within the
trees. I intend to take at least one out with an arrow. Then, I will swoop down upon them.
They will flee, but I will capture one."
"You're going to kill one of them?" Great reluctance became very evident in the face
of the delver.
"I can't kill anything."
Lief's eyes narrowed, his loathing more apparent. "I will take care of that, not you."
"But I won't be a part of it, either."
The elf bit back a flash of anger. He looked almost scornfully at the delver. His own
hate and dispassion for the race of goblins exploded like a flare. "Very well, I will go
alone."
"I'll warn them," Ryson stated firmly, revealing he had no intention of backing down.
Lief's anger doubled, tripled. He was about to condemn the delver with every curse
known to the elves, but his anger soon gave way to understanding. He saw compassion in
the eyes of the delver. It was not fear which spurred Ryson to refuse the plan, it was a
respect for life.
"I see," the elf grumbled. "Is there any way to convince you that what you protect is
unworthy of such lofty standards?"
"No," Ryson responded simply.
"Very well." Lief gave one final glance at the outline of Sanctum in the distance.
Under ordinary circumstances, he would have staunchly argued the lowly worthlessness
of the goblin. Their renewed existence in the land filled him with malevolence and
disgust, but it also underscored the nature of his worst fears. Great magic is needed to
allow goblins to pass upon the land, this was undeniable, magic which could only be
found in the Sphere of Ingar. The thought hammered at him, and the growing importance
of the sphere left little time to debate the issue.
"You give me no choice. I will not press you to change your mind at this time. I will
only tell you that you may eventually be forced into a position where such high standards
become impossible. I do not think you understand the severity of the situation you face.
One day a horde of these creatures may attack your home. They will not think twice
about killing every inhabitant."
"That may be," Ryson allowed, "but that is not yet the case. I won't be part of
unnecessary killing."
"Like I said before, I won't attempt to change your mind at this time. Will you accept
my plan if I promise I will not hit any of the loathsome creatures with my arrow?
Instead, I will send several that will miss the mark. That will serve to create confusion
and force the goblins to flee. I will then capture one."
"I'll take your word for that," Ryson acknowledged. "And I accept it."
"Very good. Let us move now. Each moment we delay, the goblins entertain the
chance for increasing their numbers. I will go this way." The elf pointed to a low path
within the branches to his left. "I will stop roughly forty paces from their position. When
I see the guard tumble from the tree, I will shoot four or five arrows over their heads.
After you take out the guard, remain within the branches. If you drop too close to the
goblins, they might strike out at you in the confusion. They will not regard your life with
the same high standard you afford them."
"I understand."
"Go now!" the elf commanded before moving off in his designated direction.
The delver paused for but a moment, then followed a different path back toward the
goblins. He gritted his teeth to fight back his growing anxieties over the danger he now
faced. While he remained in control of his movements, his thoughts swelled over the
image of facing hundreds of goblins, no less hundreds of thousands.
What was happening to the world he lived upon? He fought the undead, traveled with
an elf, and now planned to attack goblins. If not for the seriousness with which his
parents told him of the legends, he would have believed himself insane. Yet now, the
legends were revealing themselves to him, revealing themselves in a way which he could
not simply dismiss as illusion or dream.
In such instances of distraction, Ryson focused upon the task at hand. It was time to
force the maddening puzzles from his consciousness and allow the deepest of his instincts
to control his movements. He stalked the goblins from above. He glided from branch to
branch with such diligence that the guard had no warning of his approach.
The delver gained a position high above the guard, then moved downward. Spiraling
around the trunk, Ryson used branches and leaves to cover his advance. He gained a
position within arm’s reach before the goblin even knew of his existence.
The goblin shifted its head at the sign of a disturbance. It growled in surprise and fear
as a shadowy figure moved swiftly toward it.
Before the puffy face turned completely about, the delver pulled the crossbow from
out of its hands. He thew it aside. It crashed through the branches and fell harmlessly to
the ground. Ryson quickly grabbed the heavy chest plate of the goblin. He twisted and
pulled until the goblin became displaced from the thick bough it clung to.
As Ryson held the goblin aloft in mid-air, the creature looked up and snarled. Foamed
spit cascaded from its angry mouth.
The creature weighed barely more than a small child, and Ryson had no difficulty in
maintaining his grip. He saw the distance to the ground and decided not to simply drop
the goblin. Instead, he hoped to lower it before releasing his hold, thus reducing the risk
of injury to the creature.
The goblin, however, did not care about the possibility of falling. It remained far more
concerned about being in the grip of a trespasser. It continued to snarl and spit as it
waved its hands in the air. Suddenly, it found its balance and quickly brought its right
arm to its side. The goblin grasped the hilt of a short sword and pulled the blade from its
sheath.
The disturbance in the tree alerted the other goblins below. More snarls and growls
erupted. The goblins raced about and around the tree. They pulled their crossbows from
their backs and began pulling bolts from pouches attached to their waistbands.
Before any of the ground level goblins could load their crossbows, long powerful
arrows sizzled through the air just above their heads. Four shafts whistled by with great
force and plunged into the surrounding tree trunks.
The goblins fell into disarray. Their concern over their comrade above vanished
instantly. Panic divided them. Without great numbers, they knew of their extreme
vulnerability. They scattered without a second thought.
Ryson ignored the commotion below him. He concentrated on keeping his grip on the
goblin as he lowered himself down the tree. He shook the goblin with all the force he
could muster to keep the creature from striking at him.
The goblin fought against its capture. It made two attempts to strike at Ryson's arm,
but each time it failed. Just as it lifted its hand to swing, it was jostled with great force,
and the blade struck empty air. It seemed ambivalent to the distance to the ground as it
continued to strive for a clean strike. Such a chance opened when the goblin gained hold
of another branch with its free hand. Suddenly steadied, the goblin resisted the shaking of
the delver. Gleeful fury filled its eyes as it prepared to amputate Ryson's arm.
Only the skill and quickness of being a delver allowed Ryson to avoid the blow. He
released hold of the goblin and pulled his arm back. The blade of the short sword passed
harmlessly through the air.
The goblin, no longer supported by the delver, found itself unprepared to maintain its
grip on the branch. It could not hold its own weight and it plummeted to the ground. It
landed with a perplexing bounce, almost as if its body were made of rubber. The creature
appeared no worse for wear and scrambled to its feet. In but a mere instant, it was quickly
scurrying off into thicker cover.
At that same moment, Lief jumped into the clearing once occupied by the goblins. He
swirled his head about. His eyes darted over the different paths of the departing creatures.
With barely a delay, he seized upon one trail. He leapt after the scurrying goblin with
stone-like determination. Over rocky and rooted soil, he raced through the forest keeping
his eyes locked upon the fleeing creature. He slapped branches away from his path as he
continued to pursue.
The goblin made chase difficult. It used its size to its advantage, choosing narrow
paths under low lying branches. It jumped through thick brush whenever possible. It also
turned frequently as it used its greater mobility to out distance the elf.
Lief continued to follow relentlessly even as the distance between the two increased.
He ignored the stinging pain to his face as pine needles brushed against his cheeks.
Eventually, however, he realized the futility of his chase. He pulled to a halt and quickly
drew an arrow from his quiver. He placed it upon the string of his bow, but before he
could draw, the delver called to him.
"Don't shoot it!" Ryson commanded. The delver darted past the elf almost as a blur.
Such was the speed he moved past Lief, the elf felt a small breeze.
Ryson took up the chase where Lief left off, but the delver moved at far greater speed.
He cut through each barrier of the forest as if it were nothing more than tissue paper. He
turned with pinpoint accuracy and quickly cut the distance between himself and the
goblin. In mere moments, he reached out and grabbed the back of the goblin's neck.
This time, the delver would take no chances in losing control of the creature. His hand
darted to the goblin's belt and beat the creature to the handle of the short sword. He drew
it away from the creature but held it threateningly.
The goblin eyed first the point of its own sword and then the delver. It hissed once,
then became still, as if accepting its fate.
Ryson carried the goblin to a clearing in the forest. He dropped it to the ground but
made it clear the goblin was not to move. He kept his eyes on the creature as he called for
the elf.
Lief arrived quickly. As he stepped nearer to the goblin, he examined it sternly. He
folded his arms across his chest and looked down on the goblin with great contempt.
"Why have you returned to these lands?!" The elf spoke with a cold demanding voice.
At first the goblin did not answer.
"Do not try my patience," Lief advised sternly. "You were captured by a delver, a fullbred delver. He can capture another one with the same ease he caught you. If you do not
speak, I will dispose of you and we will bring another captive to your lifeless body. I am
sure the next will be more willing to talk."
The goblin snarled at the elf before casting a wary eye upon Ryson. The creature
looked him over carefully.
"You are delver?" the creature finally spoke. Its lips snarled as the voice carried with a
low-toned whisper.
"Yes," Ryson managed. He felt ill at ease actually speaking to such a diminutive
monster.
"What is your name?"
Ryson did not answer.
"Your name?!" the creature demanded.
"Tell him," the elf advised while keeping a cold stare upon the goblin.
"My name is Ryson Acumen."
The goblin paused. It stood stoic as if going through long past memories in its head.
With a nod of futility, the goblin turned its attention back to the elf.
"If I tell you what you ask, will you release me?"
"I make no promises," Lief responded coldly.
"Then neither do I. I shall tell you nothing unless you give me your word for freedom.
Otherwise, threaten me all you wish."
"I will release you only if you speak the truth," the elf conceded. "If I sense a shred of
lies in your answers, I will deal with you harshly. Answer me without lies and I will
release you to the forest, but I will not return your weapons. That is my word."
"No weapon?! I will be defenseless!" the goblin protested vehemently.
"Find your friends. They shall have to assist you."
"I may not find them in time."
"Enough!" Lief roared. "Your time is up. Take my word now or we shall begin our
hunt for another. What is your answer?!"
"I agree to accept your word," the goblin stated. "What are your questions?"
The elf sneered at the goblin. "Why are you here?"
"The magic allows us to be here," the goblin replied shortly.
"The magic of the sphere?"
"If you speak of the orb created by Ingar, I can not say."
The elf's eyes narrowed in anger and distrust. "Do not forget my word. I will only
release you if you speak the truth."
"I speak the truth," the creature stated dispassionately. "I know not where the magic
comes from. All I know is its presence. It is here and I am here."
"What has happened to the sphere?" the elf demanded.
"I do not know."
"Have your kind seized it?!"
"I do not know."
The elf boiled over with anger. He raised an arm to strike out at the goblin.
The goblin hissed, but veered away. It crouched down spitting and snarling in a
defensive position.
Lief moved forward but Ryson cut between him and the goblin.
"That won't help," the delver protested.
"I grow tired of listening to these ridiculous replies!" Lief growled. "It states the magic
lets it be here, yet it refuses to tell me where the magic comes from. This creature must be
taught that I will not tolerate such things!"
Ryson continued to block the elf's path to the goblin. "But what if it's telling the
truth?"
The elf did not respond. He stared angrily at the goblin, but made no further attempt to
move forward.
"Maybe it really doesn't know," Ryson suggested. He then turned his attention to the
goblin. He spoke softly but sternly.
"Do you know where the magic is coming from?"
The goblin eyed the delver carefully before answering. "No, but I would guess it is
from the orb."
"Why?"
"Not since the orb was encased in the mountain have we been able to walk these
lands. But now, we can do so again."
"Where do you come from?"
"Another place."
"How does the magic help you here?"
"It opens the door, unlocks the gate and lets us through. For ages we have been unable
to break through, but now the door is open once more."
Ryson considered the goblin's answer before continuing. "Do you know what might
have happened to allow this?"
"No," the goblin stated flatly.
"Do you know what has happened to the sphere?"
"No."
Ryson turned to his companion with a questioning glance. "Does any of this help
answer your questions?"
"Not at all. All I can be sure of is that the sphere is free from containment. This
creature might say the goblins have nothing to do with that, but its presence so close to
the mountain casts much doubt. I would not be surprised if we have heard nothing but
lies."
"I have not lied!" the goblin objected vigorously. "I have not lied in order to hold you
to your bargain. You are an elf, you have given your word. I have done everything that
will force you to hold to that word. You must release me!"
"I will keep to my word," Lief stated coldly. "You will finish answering my questions
first. Why are you here, at Sanctum Mountain?"
"It is where the door leads us," the goblin answered through a sneer.
"How many have entered the land so far?"
"More than I know."
"Where are they now? We only counted seven besides you."
"They are scouting the lands in small parties. We stayed behind to await others that
will cross over."
"What are your plans in this land?"
The goblin spoke forcibly and defiantly. "What they have always been. We are here to
conquer. We will take our rightful place as leader of this land. Our numbers will swell
until we are as the ocean. We will sweep across every territory, we will ..."
"Enough!" Lief ordered. He mulled over the goblin's words for but a moment. He
proposed one final question. "Do you know how to close this door which lets the goblins
enter this land?"
"If I did, I would not tell you even if it meant my life," the goblin stated scornfully.
"Even if it allowed you to back away from your bargain, I would not tell you. The truth
remains that I do not know how to open or close the door. It is the magic which does so.
Thus, I have answered truthfully. I hold you to your bargain, elf!"
"Very well. Leave my sight! But heed this warning. The elves are now aware of your
presence. If the age old war must resume, we shall be ready. Your numbers have never
turned a single battle in history. Also be warned, my bargain stands for this moment
alone. If we meet again, you will not survive."
The goblin responded with angry spit at the feet of the elf. It turned and raced into the
forest.
The delver and elf stood beside each other and watched the creature disappear into the
thickening woods. Lief turned his head and motioned to the short sword which remained
in the hand of the delver.
"It seems you now have a trophy of your capture."
Ryson held the sword aloft as he inspected it carefully. It was a crude weapon, hardly
a fine piece of handcraft. The blade was sharp and sturdy, but it lacked any true dignity or
style. It held no proud etchings, nor did it shine with any degree of polish. The handle
remained plain and functional. No stones or jewels decorated its base. The sword served
its ultimate purpose as a weapon, nothing more.
"Hardly a thing to look at," Ryson admitted.
"True enough," Lief agreed. "A goblin's short sword is practical. It will, however,
assist you in battle greater than your own dagger. I suggest you hang on to it for now."
The mention of battle reminded Ryson of the final words of the goblin and the elf. The
bitterness between the two and the mention of war weighed heavily upon him. He could
not help but pose a question. "How many goblins will end up here?"
"If the magic is truly free, more than we will ever count."
"That's a frightening thought."
"There are more frightening aspects of what we face. The goblins are pawns, pawns to
the magic, pawns to other more powerful and more evil creatures. They are probably the
least of our worries."
"You're kidding?"
"Unfortunately, no. The Sphere of Ingar is the most powerful and dangerous talisman
ever created. Its freedom means the return of more than just goblins. Elflore tells of many
monsters which disappeared after the encasing of the sphere. Its freedom may mean the
return of all of them. River rogues, vampires, mountain shags, endless undead warriors;
all may be walking upon our land as we speak."
Ryson did not respond. He looked vacantly out into the forest and beyond to the
shadows of Sanctum Mountain.
"All of these creatures in themselves are dangerous," the elf continued, "but they pale
in comparison to the release of the magic. It is the magic that truly threatens the elves. I
wonder how many of my camp are already falling ill. No, the goblins are the least of our
worries. We must concentrate upon the fate of the sphere."
That was the second time Lief mentioned possible suffering of the elves. Ryson
wished for further clarification, but even with the great pull of his curiosity, he knew this
was not the time or place for such discussions. He took a chance to survey the area. He
looked through the trees in order to gain a perspective of the sun. It was fully behind
Sanctum Mountain which was just ahead of them to the west.
"We can probably reach a clearing on the side of the mountain before dark," the delver
stated, "but I don't think that's advisable. We should camp here for the night. The trees
can offer us greater protection."
"I agree," Lief said with a nod of acceptance. He hated allowing time to pass through
his fingers, but he could not deny the circumstances of the moment. If goblin scouting
parties moved about, it would not do well to be caught in the open without cover. "Let me
suggest, though, that we do not choose a site so close to the spot where the goblins made
their own camp. They may return in the dark. We should move south of here and find a
secure place high in the trees."
"That sounds good to me."
The two moved off quickly and quietly and found a suitable perch with many paths for
escape. They rested comfortably in the trees as the dark of night began to spread.

In the dark of night, during the peace of rest in high branches of an elderly oak, the
delver had much to consider. A full day, a day of revelations was laid to rest before him.
Encounters a delver might wish for in a lifetime were his in but one passing of the sun
overhead.
Each moment of discovery printed itself indelibly upon his mind. There would be no
forgetting. In his last days upon the land, he would recall this chain of events which
ushered in a greater knowledge. His world had changed so drastically. Everything he
knew, or thought he knew, was challenged. Everything he believed he understood was
now confused. The land of Uton was forever changed, and him with it.
With so much passing through his mind, Ryson turned to the elf. He sought insight on
what might be the mitigating force behind all that was happening.
"Tell me what you know about the sphere," Ryson asked.
"What is it you wish to know exactly?" Lief replied complacently.
Ryson answered with all honesty. "I want to know everything."
"That would take all the night and most of the next day," Lief countered. "Besides, it
seems you know of it already. It is clear to me that you have an understanding of the
legends. Is there something in particular that confuses you?"
"Right now everything confuses me. You seem to believe that the sphere is at the heart
of whatever is going on. I can't argue that point, and I don't wish to, but if the sphere is
the reason behind this, I'd like to know more about it. I'd also like to know why you talk
about it with such distress."
"It is very dangerous," the elf stated simply. "That is why it was encased so long ago."
"I realize that, but we've already run into things I have to consider more dangerous
than anything else I've ever faced in my life. You keep worrying about the sphere. I've
heard the legends, but I've never heard of elflore until you mentioned it. Maybe your
story is different than mine."
Lief hesitated before speaking. He folded his hands across his chest, but did not make
an immediate reply.
"You don't want to tell me?" Ryson asked curiously but without sounding offended.
"No, that is not what concerns me," Lief replied. "It is just that it is difficult to imagine
how fast things have happened. The tremor, the magic. Now I sit in a tree with a delver
who wishes to know about elflore and what we might face. I will not deny you that
knowledge. Based on what you have already done, it is your right to know. If I'm to ask
you to continue our journey, it is my obligation to tell you. It is just that less than a
season ago, I would have considered such a thing as impossible."
"You don't have to tell me that," Ryson responded with a knowing glance. "Think how
I feel. At least you knew that humans and delvers existed. I couldn't have guessed that
any of the legends were actually true."
"Now you know differently," the elf said sternly.
Ryson eyed the elf and spoke with a careful tone. "Can I ask you a question before
you tell me about the sphere?"
"You may."
Ryson tried not to hesitate, but he also wished to choose his words carefully. "Are all
elves like you? I mean, in the short time I've known you, you've shown an interesting
range of emotions. I don't mean any offense by this. Maybe I shouldn't even ask at all, but
I've noticed how you react to certain things. I've seen you laugh and smile a few times,
but you're a rather grim individual. I don't want to say you're impatient, because that's not
true, but you seem to get annoyed easily. You really got angry when we were dealing
with the goblins. Even when you and I talk, sometimes you sound as if you're annoyed
with me."
"So you think I am perhaps too quick to anger?"
Ryson shook his head. "No, I wouldn't say that. It's just that you seem to have a low
tolerance for some things. I don't think that saying you're angry would explain it. It's
more like I said before. You get annoyed."
"Don't concern yourself with insulting me," Lief replied simply. "What you tell me
now I have heard before."
"Really?"
"Of course. My own kind have pointed it out to me. They say I am quite opinionated
and that I become quickly upset. They also say my outlook is much too grim. They say I
will always find that which is bleak, even in the best of times. I guess that is why no one
wished to believe me when I first spoke of the sphere."
"The other elves say this? Does that mean you're different from the others?"
Lief raised an eyebrow. "Does that surprise you?"
"I don't know," Ryson admitted. "I'm just curious as to what elves are like."
"Let me answer your question by asking you a similar one. What are delvers like? Are
they all like you?"
"No, I couldn't say that. We're all different."
"The same applies to the elves. We all have our different personalities. While there are
some things you can perceive about elves through contact with just one, it is not correct
to make sweeping assumptions. While I might get easily annoyed, there is certainly
another elf that would hardly ever show such dissatisfaction. Some elves may believe I
am a very poor representative."
Ryson thought quietly before responding. "Poor representative or not, you’re my first
elven contact. I won’t ever forget you."
The elf simply nodded and turned his focus upon the true subject of his own concerns.
"Then let us go back to your first question. Let me tell you about what I know of the
sphere."
The darkness continued to thicken as Lief began his tale. The air grew cool as the
crickets began to chirp from the ground below. Occasionally, the hoot of an owl would
cut through the insect's music, carried aloft by the night breeze. The sounds of the
darkness seemed to flow with the words of the elf, giving emphasis to the story.
"Since you tell me you know much of the legends, I will not preface the story with any
lengthy explanations," the elf noted quickly. "A small introduction, however, is
necessary. The Sphere of Ingar was created by the Sorcerer Ingar in a final attempt to win
ultimate control of all magic. The sphere was actually constructed from the hides of
inhabitants from the land. Ingar sent out minions to capture elves, dwarves, humans,
algors, and delvers. Lore has it that he skinned them alive, and with powerful magic,
altered the hides to become portions of the sphere. With the casting of a forceful spell, the
sphere became a receptacle for power. Because each race has its own ability to harness,
control or resist the magic, the sphere became a magnet, as well as a vessel for containing
all magical energy.
"Ingar brought the sphere to all the different corners of Uton. He carried it with him at
all times but never revealed its existence or its purpose. Day after day passed and the
sphere captured more and more energy. The power became immeasurable. If Ingar had
used it at that time, he probably could have conquered the world without challenge. But
Ingar became enthralled with the very power of the sphere. He wished to capture all of
the energy in the land before he would drink of it himself.
"As the talisman soaked in the energy, the other magic casters began to notice their
powers dwindling. Each time they cast a spell, they found they could not replenish their
magical energies. Some became completely powerless as they foolishly wasted all the
energy stored within their own bodies, and even that stored in their enchanted items.
"With the realization that the magic in the world was fading, the great wizards, both
good and evil, conferred together to solve the mystery. Since they all were subject to
losing their powers, they agreed to work together. Ingar, however, was noticeably
missing from the conference. Becoming suspicious, the wizards and sorcerers believed
Ingar might be responsible. Spies were sent which never returned.
"The sorcerers considered casting spells which would reveal Ingar's actions, but most
resisted. The casting of any spell meant losing power, power which could not be
replaced. The magic casters wished to hold on to their stored energy for as long as
possible.
"Finally, Waelin, the oldest of the wizards, confronted Ingar directly. The sphere was
finally revealed. Waelin attempted to destroy it with magic, but he failed. The sphere
easily absorbed all of Waelin's power. The ancient wizard was never seen again.
"Unfortunately, during the struggle between Waelin and Ingar, a great cataclysm
occurred. The power of the sphere was altered slightly. It continued to absorb magical
energies, but it also started to discharge tainted magic. Some say it was a reaction to one
of Waelin's spell. They believe that the wizard tried to force the magic from the sphere,
but the results were disastrous. Others believe the sphere finally reached its limit and had
to release power. Whichever the case, the end result led first to the storm of Ingar's
stronghold and second to the great war with the magic casters."
"Most of this agrees with the legends I have been told," Ryson interrupted the elf.
"except the part of the sphere releasing magic. I've never heard of that before."
"It does not surprise me," Lief stated. "It was the elves which were affected first. The
energy which was emitted, although tainted by evil within the sphere, could still be used
by sorcerers and wizards. They soon began to re-energize with the magic which now
flowed freely from the sphere. The energy, however, was not clean. It was contaminated
by the sphere. The elves became keenly aware of this for we were the ones that began to
die. The magic contained a poison, and for some reason, the magical emissions targeted
the elf race first. That is why it is part of elflore."
In this, Ryson found an answer to a previous musing. "So that's why the elves are in
danger now. There's poison in the magic."
Lief nodded. "Just as it was back then.
"So what was it like? How did the elves react?" Ryson asked with greater interest.
"There was little that could be done," Lief replied sadly. "There was no way to hide or
to avoid the energy. It sought out every elf in the land. It did not kill immediately. The
very old and very young died first. The rest, though, could sense the poison eating at
them as well. And it was the sphere. There was no doubt. The energies it released were
not pure magic. It was magic with a purpose, magic tainted with harsh direction. Even as
magic casters of other races began casting spells anew, elves which grasped the magic
faced death. Even elves which tried to reject the magic could not save themselves. The
energy embraced them all.
"This is part of elflore because of the actions of a single elf. It is written that the most
sensitive magic user of the elf race, a great sorceress named Shayed, probed the
emissions. She sensed the plague within the magic. She knew at once that unless these
emissions ceased, all the elves would die.
"She also noted that the poison held the power to kill the other races. Its power could
easily be shifted to eliminate the algors, the dwarves, the delvers and even the humans.
She said this was caused by the hides of each race which formed the shell of the sphere.
She believed that the sphere would eventually alter the poison after all the elves were
destroyed. Then another race would be eliminated, then another, and another, until all
were gone.
"She used this knowledge to convince the leaders of the other races to join her, to
storm Ingar's Cove. All races, except for cliff behemoths, aligned together to capture the
sphere before it could kill them all."
"I've never heard this before," Ryson admitted. "I knew of the alliance of the races to
take the sphere, but I never heard of the poison or that it was a threat to kill everyone."
Lief was not slow in his reply. "Probably because the sphere was captured before the
elves were destroyed. Shayed stated the magic would not turn on another race until the
elves were completely eliminated. We were the only ones which faced the poison.
"In any event, the storm of Ingar's Cove was successful. Ingar was destroyed and the
sphere taken. The only thing left to decide was what to do with the sphere. It continued to
absorb pure energy and emit only that which would eventually lead to overall extinction.
Shayed claimed the sphere should not be destroyed. She feared the sudden release of the
energy would quickly kill all the elves. At her request, the great leaders of Uton decided
to encase the sphere in a tomb which would hold it forever and bar the release of any
magic. This of course led to the war with the magic casters."
"That I know about," Ryson said eagerly. "How does elflore describe the actual war?"
"The leaders of the races decided the safest place for the sphere would be deep within
Hollow Mountain. They since changed the name to Sanctum for its part in holding the
sphere. Regardless of its name, all of the magic casters became outraged that the sphere
would be encased. It meant the end of their powers. The sphere held all the magic. They
wished to destroy the sphere and release the energy within. The dark creatures also
demanded the destruction of the sphere. They could not exist without magic. Goblins,
river rogues, shags; the lot of them threatened the lives of everyone if the sphere was not
turned over to them.
"At these threats, the leaders became even more determined to see the sphere
entombed. They realized it would mean the end of all of the dark creatures, a bonus. For
this, they would even face the wrath of the magic casters.
"This led to the most bizarre of all alliances in the history of elflore, or in any of the
legends for that matter. The magic casters, both good and evil, joined forces with goblins,
vampires, mountain shags, and all the undead to take the sphere. Remember, magic
casters came from all different races. There were human wizards, elven sorcerers,
algorian healers, even dwarf magic casters, though they were few. These were individuals
willing to join with dark creatures to fight their own kind. Only Shayed remained on the
side of the allied races. She was the only magic caster not to join in with the dark
creatures."
"I didn't know that," the delver confessed. "It was my understanding that no magic
was used on our side."
"No magic was," the elf made clear. "Shayed expended all of her power in the fight
against Ingar. She had no magic left. Her ability to cast spells was no more. As a magic
caster, her craft was gone, but she would still not allow the destruction of the sphere. She
would see that it was carried from Ingar's Cove, across the prairies, and to its final resting
place. When the leaders reached the town of Connel ..."
"Connel?" Ryson exclaimed to reveal his surprise.
"Yes, Connel," the elf replied with his own note of wonder. "Didn't you know that?"
"I was never given the name of the final battle place. I always thought it was near
Sanctum Mountain."
"No, it was Connel. I might say that I find it interesting that you are from Connel.
Although I curse the prophesies for not warning us of this, I sense the hands of fate
working here."
"I don't know about that," Ryson responded. "but tell me more of what happened at
Connel." The delver watched the face of the elf as he eagerly awaited further explanation.
He hoped the elf's tale would bring him greater knowledge, more appreciation of his
home town.
"Very well. The leaders, knowing they would face a final assault by the magic casters
and dark creatures, prepared a defense at Connel. At that time, it was the last village
between Ingar's Cove and what is now called Sanctum. Delvers, like yourself, scouted the
lands to the west and found the dark creatures massing for an all out attack. Magic casters
from every race also gathered within their midst. It was their intention to take the sphere
by force before Shayed and her followers could bury it deep within Sanctum and prepare
defenses which they could not break.
"Reports from the delvers were grave indeed. The force waiting for Shayed was
overwhelming. With the magic casters on their sides, the dark creatures were nearly
assured of victory. The sorcerers and wizards would cast spells from the backs of the
lines as the undead pushed forward. So great was their numbers, that the dark creatures
could not even visualize losing.
"The hope of the elves dwindled. Even with the assistance of the other races, they
doubted their chances of survival. If they just faced the dark creatures in hand to hand
combat, they knew they would prevail, but the existence of the sorcerers and wizards
drastically reduced their chances. Shayed envisioned waves of the undead, of river
rogues, and mountain shags flowing into Connel under the cover of goblin crossbow fire
and powerful magic spells. Some of the leaders hoped the magic casters might hold their
power, for each spell cast meant energy lost. Shayed, however, revealed this as a false
hope. She knew the wizards and sorcerers would unleash all of their might, for this was
their last hope to regain their full power.
"At the suggestion of the dwarf leaders, a plan was developed and quickly enacted. All
the races knew that they would never stand a chance against the magic casters in a long
distance battle. Their only hope was to force the magic casters to close combat. The
dwarves built a powerful wall from stone within their caves. Dwarves are known for their
resistance to magic. The stone from their homes is also quite resistant. The wall was built
thick and all the races waited behind it as the attackers moved forward. The spells cast
from a distance would be reflected by the wall. The loose energy would then be captured
by the sphere which remained in the hands of the allied races.
"Building with speed and skill befitting their race, the dwarves constructed the wall
within half a day. It was finished just as the sun set. Members of the five races - dwarves,
elves, algors, humans and delvers - waited together in fortified positions behind this wall
which circled the small village of Connel. It was the last time the races would work
together in such a fashion.
"As the final light faded and darkness gripped the land, the assault began. Waves of
hideous monsters moved forward as bolts split the night from goblin crossbows. The
distant horizon sparked and glistened as wizards unleashed their powers. This, perhaps of
all things, signaled the folly of the magic casters.
"So sure of their numbers and their power, the attackers never scouted their foes. They
were totally unaware of the wall. They flung spells with mad abandon, never realizing
that the races remained protected. This squandering of their power raised the spirit of the
five races. When they saw the spells bounce harmlessly off the wall, they knew victory
would be theirs."
"I assume this wall you speak of is the ancient wall which still surrounds most of
Connel today," Ryson interjected.
"It is. Dwarven construction is boasted to last forever. I belive that is no boast at all."
Ryson rubbed his chin. A crisp image of the barrier crossed his mind. "That's amazing.
The people that live in Connel pretty much ignore that wall. No one really knows
anything about it."
"Sometimes that is the way of legends," the elf responded dispiritedly. "Over time
they are changed or forgotten completely. Those places, people and events that are
remembered are often revised to better fit the beliefs of the day."
Ryson shook his head. "But a wall of such significance to just be forgotten? That's not
right. I mean it's a wall that was built by dwarves, and people that live there don't even
believe dwarves exist."
Lief simply shrugged. "Perhaps that is why the importance of the wall has been
forgotten. To carry forward the true importance of the wall would be to admit the
existence of all the races. Although I do not have contact with them, I believe humans are
more than happy to accept the belief that they are the only inhabitants of this land."
"That's true," Ryson admitted. "They don't even like to admit to the existence of
delvers. It is arrogant, but we've learned to live with it."
"Take heart, delver. If I am right about the sphere, the humans will be in for quite a
surprise, but that is for later. As for the battle of Connel, the races did indeed win the day.
The magic casters squandered their energies and the dark warriors were quickly turned
back. The path to what is now called Sanctum was clear. The sphere would be
entombed."
Any hint of pride or exuberance which developed during the tale, quickly faded from
Lief's voice. His tone turned hollow, almost sour. His expression firmly revealed his
emotions as it hardened with the conclusion of the lore.
"Unfortunately, even after this victory by joining together, distrust began to rise.
Bickering arose between the different leaders about how to encase the sphere to make
sure that none of the races would be tempted to steal it. Trust and partnership dissolved.
Even Shayed could not bring them back together. In the end, a solution based on the
mistrust was fashioned.
"The sphere would be encased with reflectors all around it. This would ensure that the
emissions of the sphere would be turned back upon itself. It would be caught in an
endless cycle of emitting and absorbing the same energies. It would also be placed at the
very depths of Sanctum, in a cavern where the walls and floor were reinforced with
sheets of diamond constructed by the dwarves. These walls were impenetrable. They
would prevent anyone from digging through the base of Sanctum or tunneling
underground to reach the sphere from below. No, the only way to the final resting place
of the sphere was from the top of Sanctum, through its hollow core.
"Five tiers were constructed as a path from the summit to the final resting place. Each
tier was given to a single race. Then, each race would develop barriers or methods of
protection which would guard the sphere. Each race kept their defense mechanism a
secret from the other. How they guarded that tier remains an eternal secret to this day.
"I know this as fact for only elves of the most high position are allowed to know of
our secret. I assume the same holds true for the other races as well."
"I've never heard of this before," Ryson confessed with obvious confusion. "You say
each race was given a tier, even the delvers?"
"That is correct."
"But I've never heard of any barriers placed in Sanctum. Even when my parents told
me of the legend of the sphere, they never said anything about the races putting in their
own secret protections."
"Perhaps they do not know. Perhaps only the elder delvers are aware?"
"I don't know," Ryson shook his head. "To tell you the truth, I really don't think so.
Delvers are not a closely knit group. We mix with the humans freely. I don't know of any
delvers that hold so closely to their heritage that they might remember such a thing."
"Perhaps, you simply don't know of all the delvers. Perhaps those that may hold the
secret of Sanctum keep themselves hidden under veils of secrecy. Remember, before this
day you did not know of goblins or elves."
"That's very true," Ryson acknowledged. "And I never heard portions of this story
about the sphere until now. So what finally happened?"
Lief's tone grew colder still. "The obvious. The sphere was entombed and each race
placed their defenses within Sanctum. The dwarves sealed the entrance to the tiers with
observers of every race present. With no further word, each race went its own way. The
dwarves returned to their caves, the algors returned to the desert, and we returned to the
thick woods. The humans and delvers, for some reason, remained together. As time went
on, interaction between the other races dwindled to near nonexistence."
Upon the elf's conclusion, Ryson stood up on the thick branch he rested upon. He
walked further out to the edge of the tree and caught a glimpse of Sanctum. Its shadow
was present even in the faint starlight. He stood silent for long moments considering that
day long ago when the five races separated.
"How long ago was that?" he asked somberly.
"Long before any event you might be able to place in the current of time, that is, other
than the legends themselves."
"But you said your father saw goblins."
"And he did, but those were remnants of the final battle. Goblins escaped Connel and
held to this land long after that fateful day. Keep in mind my father was not yet born
when the sphere was entombed. Elves live a very long time. He is no longer with me now
and he lived for a very long time."
Ryson continued to stare at Sanctum. "So long ago," he whispered. "All this time, all
of us living apart. Yet, at one time, they all stood together at the top of that mountain.
Standing together and watching the end of life as they knew it. I can't imagine what they
must have been feeling."
"Elflore speaks of it as a time of joyful sadness," Lief noted.
"That doesn't make much sense," the delver stated with his thoughts still focused upon
the image of the final congregation at the summit.
"It does if you consider everything they faced," Lief responded quickly, as if feeling it
necessary to defend elflore. "They just won a major victory based on their cooperation,
yet now they mistrusted each other. Magic was removed from the land. It meant no more
evil sorcerers and corrupt wizards hoping to seize power, but it also meant the end of
healers and benevolent magic casters. The dark creatures would be sealed off from the
land, but they all sensed the inevitable separation. The land was changing both for better
and worse. It was hard to feel joy without sadness, or sadness without joy."
Ryson remained on his perch within view of the mountain. "Such a moment!" he
exclaimed. "I can't imagine what it would have been like." He turned his head back to the
elf. "Was anything said? Did Shayed make any final remarks?"
"Shayed was not there," the elf stated sadly. "Remember that the sphere continued to
emit energy which was deadly to the elves. During the battle, she remained among the
leaders and in close proximity to the sphere. In the end, the energy destroyed her. She did
not live to see the dwarves close the entrance."
"I'm sorry."
"Do not be sorry. She died as proud as any elf could hope. She served as the ultimate
salvation to the elves. In answer to your question, nothing was said. The collapsing of the
rock signaled the end. Before the dust completely settled, the representatives of each race
departed."
Ryson turned his attention back to the mountain. "And so there it's stayed all this time.
The sphere's been trapped in that mountain containing all this power."
"That is, until now," Lief said firmly. "There can be little doubt now that something is
wrong. The energy is again being released. I don't know how or why, but the proof is
conclusive. The return of magic, the undead, and now the goblins. We can only hope that
the sphere is not in the hands of one of those foul creatures."
"But the goblins said they were not responsible?"
"You can not believe a goblin. They lie with the same ease they breath. Even if it is
telling the truth, there are other creatures such as river rogues, mountain shags, and
vampires. Any of these creatures may have found a way to break back into the land.
Perhaps, one of them has taken the sphere."
"Let's not go making assumptions, especially a bad one," Ryson advised. "What is it
that you hoped to do now that we've reached Sanctum?"
"I wish to climb to the summit and examine the opening. I need to see if there are any
clues as to what has happened."
"I see," Ryson noted thoughtful. "Do you think it's a good idea that you go?"
The elf raised an eyebrow and frowned.
"Hear me out before you get all annoyed," Ryson responded quickly. "What if the
sphere is still around up there. If it is, won't it still be emitting the energy that is
poisonous to elves?"
"The sphere has the power to discharge energy which is poisonous to all races. There
is nothing to say that the energy is still directed at the elves."
"But there is," Ryson disagreed. "When you told me about how Shayed probed the
magic, she believed that the magic would only be altered to focus on another race after all
the elves were destroyed. That hasn't happened yet. Also, you said that the more sensitive
elves already felt something. I think that means the energy is still focused upon the
elves."
"You miss little that I say, don't you?" the elf said.
"I'm a delver. I pay attention and remember."
"So what is it you suggest?"
"Let me go alone. I can climb the mountain faster by myself. I can examine the
summit and report back to you. It may be safer if you stay within the trees. Maybe they'll
help to shield you."
"I do not know," the elf said reluctantly. "If the sphere has been taken, I need to know
who is in possession. There may be trails left by the invader, trails you might not
recognize. You have no idea of the markings of a river rogue or mountain shag."
"But I am a scout," Ryson stated firmly. "I may not know exactly how to interpret
their trails, but I won't miss them. It's what I do. If there is anything of significance up
there, I'll find it, and I'll report back to you."
Lief soured. "I don't like it. I may need to see things for myself in order to understand
them."
"We can worry about that after I make my initial scout. There may be no reason for
you to go, no reason for you to take the risk. Let me go first, let me find what I can. If
there's something you need to look at, we can deal with that when we know for sure."
"It is a delay."
Ryson shook his head. "You have no idea how quickly I can move up that mountain."
Lief remained still upon his branch with his back to the trunk of the tree. His elfish
eyes held the delver firmly. "You are sure you would do this?"
"I would do this even if you weren't here," Ryson admitted. "There is something up
there I wish to see, something that's calling to me. I also wish to witness the ground
where the races stood together for the last time."
"You don't know what you might find up there. You may be putting yourself in great
danger."
"Haven't I done that already?" the delver asked.
"You have, but you have yet to see a mountain shag."
"I'm willing to take that risk."
"Are you, delver?" the elf questioned harshly. "Tell me how wise it is to take a risk of
which you know nothing about. You have never dealt with a mountain shag. They are
large and fierce. They would bite you in half if given a chance. You speak of willingness,
yet you understand little."
"Can they hide their scent?" Ryson asked patiently.
"What?"
"I asked if mountain shags can hide their scent."
"Not that I am aware, but what does that ..."
The delver did not let him finish. "I will be careful to note the scent of anything
strange. I won't move into an ambush. I'll do this and there's not much you can do to stop
me. Even if you attempt to follow me, I will outdistance you in no time. I don't think you
can move through the rocks as you move through these trees. I'll leave you behind, and
short of placing an arrow in my back, there's nothing you can do about it."
The elf regarded the delver with an even greater frown. "I see. You have then made up
your mind?"
"I have."
The elf shook his head. "There will be time for greater discussion in the morning. I
suggest you get some rest. Tomorrow will be an interesting day. I will take the first
watch."
He said nothing more.

Morning broke after an uneventful evening. The elf woke with the first glimmer of
light passing through the trees. To his immediate left, upon a thinner branch, he spotted a
small nest made from twigs and interwoven branches. It was filled with berries.
The delver sat opposite the elf. Straddling a thick bough, his legs swung freely in the
air. His right hand was cupped, holding another pile of the wild fruit. He ate some, some
he tossed to birds waiting in the higher branches.
"You've been busy," Lief noted. Apparently, it did not take long for the elf to free
himself from the bonds of sleep. Immediately, he was wide awake.
"May I?" Lief asked for permission before helping himself to breakfast.
"Those are all for you," the delver replied with a smile. "I've had more than my share."
Lief brushed specs of bark from his hands before indulging in the fruit. While chewing
on the first handful, he allowed himself a moment to cast a glance upon the surrounding
forest. "Can I assume there has been no sign of the goblins?"
"Not a one," Ryson replied confidently. "I took the opportunity to do some scouting
while you were asleep. I checked the perimeter about forty trees out from here. All I saw
were a few deer. They didn't seem to be alarmed by anything, either. They pointed out
our breakfast."
"Very good," the elf said and hastily finished the last morsel of fruit within the nest.
With casual ease, he stood up upon his perch. One hand rested on the trunk of the large
old oak, while the other brushed off his clothes. This ritual complete, his hands found his
sword, bow and quiver of arrows. He rearmed himself as he prepared for the coming day.
His visage turned grim as he swung about to face the outline of Sanctum mountain.
"We should lose no more time," he said bluntly.
Ryson leapt to his feet with even greater ease than the elf had displayed. He jumped
upon a rope thin branch which wavered with his weight. He showed not the slightest
imbalance, his knees bending in unison with the swaying branch. "You haven't forgotten
what I said last night, have you?"
"I haven't forgotten," the elf replied harshly, almost growling. "You intend to climb
Sanctum on your own, regardless of my warnings."
"I'm just looking out for your safety," the delver responded firmly.
The elf grunted, but made not further response. He made it clear he wished to renew
their travel as quickly as possible. Without waiting for Ryson's acknowledgment, he
began passing across the branches which stretched to the west.
Ryson joined him with a shrug. He also said nothing further, keeping his silence as he
hoped not to stir the volatile emotions of his companion.
They moved together, nearly side by side. Ryson no longer led, and Lief no longer
followed. The beckoning slopes of Sanctum Mountain became their sole objective, and it
called to both of them. They looked to no trail, and followed no path. They simply let the
trees and the ever closing outline of Sanctum dictate their steps.
It took little time to complete this last leg of their journey. Even as the sun hung low in
the eastern sky, the delver and elf broke through the edges of Dark Spruce Forest. They
leapt to the ground and stood upon a rocky clearing of the mountain side.
The days were growing longer now, and the air warmed quickly. The fallen dew of the
previous evening dried hastily in the bright sunlight, especially in this clearing. The rocks
and boulders before them were covered more with dust than any remnants of moisture.
After Ryson moved further away from the trees, he paused to check his surroundings.
First he looked to the skies. Clear blue greeted him happily. He looked to the tops of the
trees to gauge any wind. They rustled with only a small breeze. He then looked to the
sparse white clouds which floated lazily through the sky. He judged the higher altitude
winds to be no greater than the light breezes which passed through the forest. The delver
then knelt and felt the ground. While still somewhat cool from the dew, it was already
dry.
"We won't have to worry about any storms, at least for the early part of the day," he
stated more to himself than to his companion. "I think it may be warmer than normal for
this time of the season, though. The ground holds more and more heat now. And the sun
will be bright. I'll have to keep it to my back as I climb in order to maintain a clear view."
The delver then turned his attention to the mountain. He paced about a few steps to his
left, then back to his right. He arched his neck to gain different perspectives.
"It won't be a difficult climb at all. It's a steep slope, but it's straight and clean. I can
already pick out two or three paths which even a novice climber could handle."
"It was not chosen for its difficult exterior terrain," the elf stated, almost as if
responding to an insult. "Shayed and the leaders did not care how difficult it was to
climb. It was chosen due to its structure. Sanctum is a mountain with a thick and deep
base. Its sides are filled with rock and granite, yet its core is hollow. At the time of the
sphere's encasing, the dwarves explained it was an extinct volcano where the opening at
the top had collapsed on itself. It would prove the safest place to construct the tiers. The
hollow core curbed the amount of digging necessary. The ..."
Ryson interrupted the elf before he could continue. "Will you look at that!"
Lief was taken aback as he tried to follow the delver's gaze, but could see nothing
aside from the rocky side of the mountain. "What is it?"
"The path of the quake," Ryson responded hurriedly. His head darted back and forth
and all around. He looked back to the trees and then back up the side of the mountain. He
turned and paced in circles, always examining the landscape. He shook his head in
displeasure with his own carelessness. "I can't believe it took me so long to see that."
"See what?!" Lief asked desperately. The elf stood in place but looked about with
great alarm. He crouched ever so slightly and put a hand upon the bow which remained
over his shoulder. As his eyes darted back and forth across the surrounding grounds, he
could not find the origin of Ryson's dismay. "What are you looking at?!" he demanded
again, hoping to uncover the source of any threat.
Ryson, for the most part, disregarded the elf's agitation. Instead, he concentrated upon
the source of his misgivings. He spoke to himself, bitterly and scornfully, trying to place
the past events in orderly form. "I was on the trail of the tremor. When I saw the goblins
and then heard your story, I was more interested in other things. I forgot what brought me
here. That's really no excuse. I can't believe it. It's been right in front of me all this time!"
"What has been in front of you?" the elf nearly shouted, but still uncertain as to any
imminent danger, he kept his voice as guarded as his emotions would allow.
The delver turned a near disbelieving gaze upon the elf. "Can't you see it? It's what
brought us here. The quake! It started from here! Look at the mountain. Look at the
unsettled ground going up the slope. Look at those cracks. That's the greatest disturbance
we've seen yet. Follow it down to the forest. Look at some of the trees! That one's fallen
over. Look at that one, it's almost completely uprooted. Look at the leaves and branches
on the ground. That damage is fresh."
Lief took his hand from his bow, now certain that the delver's dismay came not from a
pack of goblins, but from the signs in the land. He looked to everything Ryson pointed
out. The signs were not as clear to an elf, but he could not deny them.
"Yes, I see," Lief responded with renewed alarm. "The very ground here has been
shaken badly. But are you sure this is where the quake began? Could you be mistaken?"
"I doubt it. I'm almost positive." The delver's neck arched back toward the mountain
as he pointed to signs so obvious to him. "Look at how the disturbance runs down the
mountain. Look there, a large deposit of small rocks and stones caught by that boulder.
That's a fresh avalanche. There's another one over there."
Ryson pointed to several different locations as Lief followed the directions with
growing confusion. He could not interpret these findings with the same degree of
certainty. Certain aspects appeared like nothing more than piles of sparse rocks.
The delver, however, showed not the slightest hint of doubt. He spoke with the
continued shrill of excitement hinging upon his voice. He had indeed found what he had
been searching for, found that which the Reader Matthew asked him to search out;
discovered it almost by accident, but he found it none the less.
"The rocks and stones are scattered in different directions. By the looks of the trees,
the tremor was much more powerful here. Certainly stronger than when it hit Connel.
This has to be the origin. I wonder how Matthew would react to this news."
Acknowledging the delver's expertise, Lief accepted Ryson's claim. He could not
know how such news would affect a human follower of the Book of Godson, but he knew
his own reflections. It brought little solace, and left him with greater concern. If a tremor
rose from this place, a place of great significance to all in the land of Uton, it was
important to know how and why. Lief's voice turned cold and even more demanding.
"Can you tell what might have caused it?"
Ryson shook his head. "It looks pretty natural to me. I'm not sure I can even pinpoint...
Wait a minute. There it is!"
Lief tried once more to follow Ryson's eyes to the source of attention. He was
unsuccessful and frustration poured from him.
"There's what?" the elf charged bitterly.
The excitement of discovery filled the delver. He spoke with a quick tongue.
"Roughly thirty degrees down from the summit on the southern slope. Do you see the
indentation?"
Lief brought his hand to his forehead to shield his eyes from any glare bouncing off
the mountainside. "No, I don't see anything." His reply was sour and filled with growing
impatience. Finally, thankfully, his eyes penetrated the same area revealed to the delver.
"Ah, yes. Yes I do."
"That's a definite break," the delver exclaimed. "Look at the shadows. Look at how the
sunlight fails to reflect at certain points. That's because there's nothing there. It may be
nothing more than a deep crater, but it may also be a complete split into the core."
In search of more information and now dismayed over the visible break in Sanctum's
side, Lief remained eager for answers. "Can you tell anything else from here?"
For the first time, Ryson turned his attention completely upon the elf. As a scout, it
was his job… his duty, to provide the most needed information to those that asked for his
assistance. "What do you want me to look for?"
Relieved that the delver finally gave him true attention, Lief spoke with a more
controlled tone. "I want to know why the breach is there. I want to know what caused it."
Ryson nodded his head in acceptance of the task. Before he answered, however, he
posed a question to the elf. He did so for reasons not quite clear.
"What do you think might have caused this?"
"I do not know," Lief responded sternly. "That is why we are here."
"But you're afraid of something, aren't you?"
"Of course I am!" the elf stormed. "We have found a breach in the mountain! It
reaffirms why the magic is free, but it does not explain why. What if it is the work of a
mountain shag? What if the sphere is now in its hands?! That is what I am afraid of! Do
you see any signs up there which can tell you what caused the breach or don't you?"
"Not from here," the delver replied. "But I intend to take a closer look. I want to ask
you one more question before I go. Where did the dwarves seal the original entrance?
Was it near the same spot?"
"No," the elf answered stoically. "According to elflore, the entrance was at the peak. It
opened directly into the center of the mountain and down to the upper most tier. That
breach is too low in the mountain."
"You're sure?"
"Yes, I'm sure!" Agony dripped from the elf's very words. "Why do you persist on
asking me?"
"Because something's calling me from up there, something at the top. I felt it ever
since you told me that story, but I don't think it's the quake anymore. It's something else. I
think it has to do with when they sealed the cave. I need to see it."
For Lief, impatience transformed into concern, as if the finding of the breach was not
enough. The elf looked to the delver guardedly. "I do not like to hear that. In truth, I don't
know what it means, but I saw what happened the last time you felt such an urging and
went off your original track. You walked into the undead, do you remember?"
"Of course I remember. I smelled the decay of the flesh. I think I also sensed the
magic which revived that thing. That's what I followed. But this is different. It's not
something I can smell, see or hear. It's something else. Something inside of me is telling
me to get to the top of that mountain."
"You put me in a very difficult position," Lief stated anxiously. "I need you to explore
the breach. Unfortunately, I also know how keen your senses are. Whatever is calling
you may be just as important. It may hold the answers to my questions. Time, however, is
becoming an issue. My people need to be told of what I have found. Should you forget,
goblins are appearing in this land. An unwarranted delay may prove deadly."
"I don't know what to say to you," Ryson replied honestly. "I know I have to check out
that crater up there. I even want to explore it. I can't imagine what I might find if it leads
to within the hollow of the mountain. Still, I know there's something else I must see,
something at the peak."
"Then, I will offer but one plausible solution to both our problems. You go on ahead
up the mountain, and I will follow."
"Wait a minute, I don't ..."
The elf erupted. His anger boiled over. "No! I will not wait! Last night you made it
very clear to me you would do as you please and there was nothing I could do about it.
Now, I am telling you the same thing! You can not prevent me from following you. I will
not stay here just because you say so! I will make my own decisions just as you have.
Now, if you let me finish my proposal, you will understand what I offer."
Ryson did not argue. He bit back any anger of his own.
"Go ahead," he said simply.
The elf continued through heavy breaths. "You wish to explore a part of this mountain
which may or may not hold importance to us. I wish to find out what has caused the
breach and if there is any indication of the sphere's presence. I will follow you up the
mountain, but I will not hold you up. You will go forth at your best speed and reach the
breach first. Examine what you will, but be careful. We must both remember that there
are secrets hidden in this mountain that neither of us may understand. If you complete
your investigation before I have reached the rupture and you feel there is nothing which
alarms you, continue on your quest up the mountain. Find whatever it is you seek, but do
not delay. While you are exploring the top of this mountain, I will examine the break for
myself. I will make my own judgments. If I find something which raises my concern, I
may not wait for you. I may leave to warn the other elves."
The delver considered the proposal for but a heartbeat. He could not argue its logic or
its merit. "I understand, and I guess I can't really argue with any of that."
"No, you can not. Now, let us go. We've wasted enough time as it is."
With nothing further to say, both elf and delver began moving up the mountain. The
climb was fairly easy with few obstacles, but within an instant the delver quickly pulled
away from his slower companion. Even as the grade of the slope increased, Ryson
bounded forward as if he were moving over flat, smooth ground.
For Lief's part, the elf moved gracefully at times, but it was apparent that rocky slopes
were not the trees of Dark Spruce. He stepped with more conviction and with less ease.
He labored at times with the steep grade. It was also difficult for him to keep his attention
purely on the climb. The smooth movements of the delver were certainly a spectacle to
see. Lief took his focus away from his own footing more than once to marvel at Ryson's
speed and agility.
Ryson stopped every now and then to check his surroundings. He took heed of the
elf's warnings and made sure he would not stumble upon anything blindly. He checked
for loose dust in the air which might signal movement ahead of him, and he listened
intently for sliding rocks. He sensed nothing. He peered down to the forest and watched
carefully for any signs of goblins. He smelled the clean warm air, and in everything, he
sensed no sign of danger.
He took time to check the ground and saw the great disturbance in the soil. He was
now certain that the quake which rolled through Connel must have originated from this
mountain. Still, everything he examined appeared natural. He saw no signs of man-made
tunneling, no sign of digging or of excavating. The fallen rocks, the loose soil, the raised
ground; all appeared the natural result of a powerful tremor.
As Ryson moved to within range of the crater, he took a position behind a large
boulder. He pulled his spyscope from his belt and made his first examination from a safe
distance.
The hole in the side of the mountain was as tall as two men and almost as wide. The
sunlight cascaded in at an angle and lit up the western edge of the break. From where he
stood, he could not see a bottom to this crater. Instead, it formed more of a cave entrance.
He knew it was very deep, he just did not know how far it traveled.
He circled about the opening before approaching. Remaining ever careful of ambush,
he continued to sense not a shred of danger. He stopped at several points to take a look
into the opening, but still he could not see the bottom of this crevice.
Finally, secure that no danger of ambush existed; he stepped up directly to the breach.
He stopped right at the foot of the opening and peered deep into its center. The break
formed a tunnel which apparently bore clean through. It dove through the rock at a fortyfive degree angle and continued far beyond the delver's vision. Nothing but darkness
welcomed his sight.
Ryson knelt and checked the rim of the opening. The soil was still loose, but the
surrounding rock felt sturdy, and there was no threat of collapse. He stood and felt the top
as well as the sides, still checking the integrity and soundness of the rock.
Secure that the tunnel would not collapse around him, the delver began to step down
into the crevice. He took several steps forward into the shadows. He bent his knees
slightly to compensate for the downward pitch of the floor.
Out of the sunlight, he let his keen vision adjust to the dark. He soon could see further
into this newly created passage. It formed a long cavern which continued far and deep
down through the mountain. It curved ahead of him, thus he could not see its ultimate
destination.
He paused briefly for a quick examination of the interior walls. He examined the sides
of the cavern and noted their texture. They showed no sign of being disturbed by tools or
explosion. Shovels and picks always made definite breaks, but the surrounding walls
were almost smooth, as if one solid cylinder broke through the wall in one mighty burst.
Explosions leave smoke residue and burn marks, but he found neither.
Ryson took a few more cautions steps forward. Unknowingly, he slammed into an
unseen barrier. The unexpected impact dropped him to the seat of his pants. He slid
slightly down the slope of the cavern floor until again he hit the same unseen barrier with
his feet.
Surprised, the delver swung his head back and forth trying to find an answer. He saw
nothing behind him. Ahead was nothing more than the continued path of the tunnel. He
was alone in the cavern, yet something had dropped him to the ground. That something
remained directly in front of him.
From a sitting position, he reached out his arms and his palms pushed flat against an
invisible wall. He pushed at the barrier, gently at first, then with greater force. The
unseen wall would not give. He lifted a leg and placed his foot against it. He used all the
leverage he could muster, but still the barrier held him back.
"What in the name of Godson in this?" he muttered to himself as he struggled against
the slope to return to a standing position.
Again, he reached out and found the barrier with his hands. He followed it from left to
right and found that it extended from wall to wall. He continued moving his hands about,
trying to find a hole or a break. None existed. It appeared to cover the entire width of the
passage.
Ryson stepped back and glanced around his feet. He spied a small stone and picked it
up. With a slight flick of his wrist, he gently cast the stone at the barrier. It was an
amazing sight. The stone floated through the air until it hit the barrier. It jolted to a stop
in midair and dropped straight to the ground. It barely made a sound upon impact with
the invisible wall, but its thud upon reaching the ground echoed through the crevice.
Shaking his head with puzzlement, he turned and climbed back out into the open air. He
stood outside the crevice considering what he had found. He could not, however, divine a
reasonable explanation.
Of course, the unreasonable reared up with disturbing possibilities. Magic. Was this
yet one more case of something he could not fathom? He was growing weary of such
explanations. Just once, he would have hoped to venture upon something of a more
conventional nature, something which might not seem so implausible.
Ryson wondered if Lief might explain this phenomenon. He checked the elf's
progress. The elf was closing on his position, yet he was still several paces away.
Ryson sighed. He looked further up the mountain. He continued to sense a strong
attraction from a point near the top. He felt no danger, only a summoning. The pull was
strong, and he greatly desired to move further up the mountain. The existence of the
barrier, however, created an anchor which kept him in place. He waited at the mouth of
the crevice until the elf reached him.
Lief did not appear winded by the climb. He stepped up to Ryson with diligence, and
he immediately noted the concern on the delver's face.
"What have you found?" the elf demanded.
"I'm really not sure," the delver responded without shame in admitting his confusion.
"I started checking out the hole and I couldn't see the bottom. I wanted to see if it led all
the way into the mountain, so I started walking into it."
Lief listened carefully as he stepped up to the break in the mountain wall. He peered
into the shadows as Ryson continued.
"I got a few steps inside," the delver explained, "then I hit something. It was like a
wall, but it's invisible."
If the presence of the invisible barrier alarmed the elf, he did not show it. It was the
breach which held his concentration, a break in a mountain which was supposed to be
indestructible. "Did you see anything or anyone? Did you hear anything?"
"Didn't see or hear anything," Ryson responded simply.
Lief would wait not a second more before further examination of the tunnel.
"Let's take a look," he stated bluntly.
The elf stepped slowly forward. Ryson followed behind.
Ryson pointed to an area a few paces forward. "The barrier's just ahead."
Lief stopped before he took more than three steps into the crevice.
"What's wrong?" the delver asked pensively.
"Don't you feel it?" the elf's agitation was clearly apparent on his face. His hands
shook slightly and he wrung them together as if hoping to remove an unwanted film.
"Feel what?" Ryson questioned as he watched the elf with growing concern.
The elf's voice remained firm, but within his tone of both strength and impatience, a
hint of fear became noticeable for the first time. "The magic. It is pouring out of this
hole."
"You can feel it?"
"Yes. Yes, I can. This does not bode well. I should not stay here for long. Quickly,
show me this barrier."
The two continued forward. Ryson walked with outstretched arms until he found the
invisible wall.
Lief walked up to it and examined it quickly.
"It is a force field," he stated. "It will block our path. We don't have the power to
break it. Long ago, magic casters surrounded themselves with these invisible fields of
energy to protect themselves from arrows and stones. They could concentrate upon their
spells and release them through the force field. It will keep us out, but it won't prevent the
energy from flowing to the outside. That's why the magic is able to escape. Follow me
now. We need to get back to the free air."
Lief stepped quickly upward. As he broke out into daylight, he stepped to a safe
distance away from the breach.
"Are you alright?" Ryson asked with obvious concern as he followed.
"Yes, the magic is more dispersed out here, but none of this bodes well. The power of
the sphere is being funneled out of the mountain through that crevice. It is just as I feared.
Unfortunately, I still don't know why. I can only imagine that some horrid creature has
found the power to dig through the mountain and break through the diamond walls. It
must be down there now directing the power through the tunnel it made."
"I don't think so," Ryson responded. "I checked the walls of the tunnel. It didn't look
like a dig. Also, the force which made it pushed out from within the mountain, not from
here inward."
The elf's frown grew just as his eyes widened. "Are you sure?"
"Absolutely. I saw the way the rock was broken. All the angles indicate the force
came from the inside and pushed out."
"But that doesn't make any sense. I know the sphere is still inside there. I can feel the
magic pouring out. Why would this cavern exist if that is so? If it was used as an escape
route to take the sphere to a safe place, I would understand. But the sphere is still there!"
"I can't explain it. I just know what I saw."
"Fire upon all of this!" the elf said in frustration. "This has become too much for me. I
need counsel. I must return to my camp and explain what we have seen. Although I am
already in debt to your service, I ask that you accompany me. You will help me in forcing
the truth upon them."
"I'll go," Ryson said quickly, "but I want you to come with me up the mountain first.
There's something up there I need to see. I think you might need to see it as well."
Lief actually groaned. The weight of his problems became more visible with each
second. He shook his hands out in front of him as he animated his consternation.
"We do not have time to go on a delver hunt! Don't you understand what we've
found?! Sanctum has been breached! We do not yet know why or by whom."
"The answer may lie up there," the delver replied, taking no offense at the elf's
outburst. While he had only known Lief for little more than a day, Ryson already
accepted the fiery spirit of the elf's personality.
Lief eyed the delver harshly. "Fire upon you! Now you leave me no choice. I could
not leave now if I wanted to! I'm aware of your powers and your great senses. By telling
me an answer is so close, I could not do anything but follow you to whatever you seek! I
only hope what you say is true. To waste time now may be more than foolish, it may be
fatal." The elf paused. He sighed and groaned simultaneously. He brought one hand to his
forehead as if trying to wipe away his problems. When he spoke again, his tone was
forceful, yet sincere. "I will not hang that upon you, though. I will only ask you to probe
deeply that which you feel. Is it merely curiosity to a story I spoke of which attracts you,
or is it something more? Examine closely! Do you truly believe it is something related to
what we now face or is it simply the hold of a legend?"
Ryson took the request with great seriousness. He shut his eyes and stood perfectly
still. He cleared his mind of all other thoughts. He focused upon the far off sensation
which beckoned him to climb further up the mountain. He seized it with every fiber of his
being. This was something his father taught him long ago. It was the only way for a
delver of his powers to choose a single path when many called to him. This deep and pure
moment of pointed concentration allowed Ryson to truly judge that which held the
greatest importance. He had done it before, but he had never experienced what happened
at that moment.
A voice spoke out in his mind. It was not his. It spoke softly, yet with authority. It was
most definitely the voice of a woman, but it was a voice he had never heard before.
"You must come now," the voice said simply. Nothing further.
The delver's eyes shot open. He swerved around and looked up to the peak of
Sanctum.
"We have to get up there now," he said with a great sense of urgency.
Lief showed no sign of disappointment at the decision. He noted the look of
astonishment on the delver's face, but did not ask for further explanation. He accepted the
delver's decision without hesitancy.
"Then let us go now," the elf said simply.
Lief and Ryson scampered further up the mountain without another word. Ryson
slowed his pace, refrained from breaking into a full gallop which would have surely left
the elf behind. He wished the elf to accompany him, to remain at his shoulder. He did not
know why, but he knew that they should reach the top together.
As they rounded a corner ledge and stepped up to a level platform at the top of the
mountain, an answer presented itself. It offered explanation for the voice in Ryson's mind
just as it muddled his perception of reality to an even greater extent.
Standing upon the open ground, or perhaps floating would better describe it, the
ghostly form of a woman greeted the two with silent appreciation. The spiritual outline
was undeniable, as was the joyful rapture which accented her dream-like countenance.
She cast no shadow even as she stood in direct sunlight. Her form was ethereal,
intangible. The outline of rocks behind her was visible through every span of her
silhouetted figure.
Not a shred of her person carried any hint of color. Whiteness of different shades cast
the different parts of her body, gave her form greater identity. Her facial features were
distinguishable, but they remained softened, almost blurred by the lack of any true
substance. Her flowing gown simply glittered and shimmered in the sunlight. Not even
her long hair displayed a trace of anything besides white; not brown, nor blonde. If Ryson
held any images of a ghostly spirit, this would certainly fit.
Lief traveled only slightly behind Ryson. When he came into sight of the apparition,
he froze. He could not find his voice to speak. His feet anchored him in place.
Ryson, while also jolted with overwhelming awe, was not quite as affected. He moved
a careful step closer, for the figure appeared to welcome them. He was unaware of Lief's
frozen state. His attention, his every sensation, focused on the incomprehensible figure
before him. It was a magnet for all his curiosities.
It was at that moment that the delver noticed the pointed tips of the spirit's ears. Even
with the ill-defined edges of the apparition's silhouette, this trait was undeniable. If this
truly was a ghost, it was the spirit of an elf.
Unsure of exactly what to say, Ryson's first words rambled out somewhat randomly.
"I felt something calling me. Actually I heard a voice call me up here. I believe it was
your voice. I hope it was your voice." An honest statement, for somehow the delver knew
it was an honor to be acknowledged by this benevolent apparition.
"Indeed, it was," the spirit said with a continued beaming smile. "I am Shayed."

"You're Shayed of the elflore legend?" the delver finally spoke up. Facing the spirit,
Ryson had completely forgotten that Lief was just behind him. The unmoving elf could
not make a sound and became a forgotten statue. Ryson's attention thus remained
unbroken and focused upon the form of Shayed.
"I am." The apparition's mouth moved as she spoke, but her voice resounded from her
core, as if it were the center of her soul which generated the sound for her words.
Even as untold questions haunted the delver, one could not be ignored. "Aren't you
supposed to be dead?"
"My body died long ago, if that's what you ask."
"So you're a ghost?"
"I am Shayed," the spirit replied as if it were a simple explanation.
Ryson rubbed his forehead in exasperation. He had hoped for affirmation of her status,
but she seemed to decline. If she had simply admitted to being a ghost, his confusion
might have ebbed. As it remained with him, he fought valiantly for at least partial
comprehension. "You were dead, but now you're back. If I hadn't been through so much
in the last day, I would have never believed this. But you are here and you are speaking to
me. I can't help but accept that much." He took his hand from his head and glanced back
at Shayed. "Now, just because I say I accept it doesn't mean that I understand it. If you're
dead, you shouldn't be here. I mean, I've never heard of anyone talking to ghosts before,
if you even are a ghost. Sure, I've heard ghost stories, but this isn't right."
"Do you believe in ghosts?" Shayed asked with a genuine desire to help him through
his confusion.
At that moment, it was difficult, if not impossible, for the delver to explain what he
believed.
"I don't know," he stammered. He made every attempt to answer the question, as if he
knew it might hold the key to final understanding. "I believe in souls, but I don't know if I
believed something like this was possible."
"It was not before now."
Ryson shook his head. "I don't understand." He sighed as if giving up.
"The sphere is again radiating its captured energies into the world," the elf sorceress
said with a smile, reassuring the delver. "That is why your beliefs are no longer as you
would have them. Even in its corrupted form, the return of magic means the return of
many things. The ghosts in the stories you spoke of might have indeed been souls trying
to return to this land, yet without magic they could not make the transition complete. That
is no longer a problem."
"So what's that mean? Now, along with everything else, ghosts are going to start
roaming around just like everybody else! You know, this is really getting ridiculous. Did
you know that yesterday I was attacked by a corpse?" His words emphasized his growing
strain. Ryson's entire life became unraveled before him. He faced a delver's nightmare.
Nothing was certain; nothing held absolute answers, whether simple or complex. Facts
were no longer facts as this cursed magic changed the rules he spent his life learning.
Shayed took compassion upon the delver. Her hazy eyes warmed with a loving glow.
"An unfortunate result of the corruption caused by the sphere. I sense the confusion
within you. I can give no remedy for that. The strain bears upon you because of what you
are. You are delver, that I am sure."
"Yes, I'm a delver. I'm Ryson Acumen. But right now that's about all I know. I wonder
now if even that's true."
The spirit laughed lightly, an open-hearted laugh. "That will always remain true. You
will always seek answers, even if they might change. View this as an opportunity, Ryson
Acumen. See this as a chance to relearn all that you believed you knew. Could a true
delver ask for more?"
"I guess not," Ryson admitted. His tensions eased, but only slightly. He still faced the
seemingly impossible. He attempted to face it with the delver spirit she strove to bring
out of him. "Does your appearance mean that other ghosts, or spirits, or whatever, will
start appearing all over the place?"
"Spirits will not simply return to this land at will. They are either summoned and
controlled by dark magic, or they must have some higher purpose."
Ryson quickly caught the underlying possibilities of such a reply. "Since I assume you
are not controlled by dark magic, I guess you have some higher purpose?"
"I do. It is a purpose of the highest order. Do not, however, misinterpret me. I am not a
savior, not a heroine who comes with the power to end the threat which exists. I play the
mere role of messenger. My ability to alter the current course may only be negligible, but
it is a purpose which allows for my presence here. It is your presence upon Sanctum
which is of greater importance. I am limited to this spot. I would not be able to travel to
find you. Your presence here signifies greater powers at work."
Ryson cast a doubtful look upon the sorceress apparition. "That's the second time I've
heard that, and I'm not sure I accept it. You talk as if some force is guiding me along. I
don't think so. I was just doing a job and things just happened. It's hard to imagine that
something else might be responsible for me being here."
Shayed cast aside his doubts. She turned the attention to Ryson's motionless associate.
"I assume it was your speechless companion that spoke of it first."
Ryson suddenly remembered that Lief was at his side. He turned to see the flustered
elf still and quiet. The delver placed a hand on the elf's shoulder as Lief's eyes stared
unblinkingly at Shayed.
"Hey, Lief." Ryson shook him lightly. "Are you alright?"
Lief regained his voice, but his skin remained gray. "It is Shayed!"
"I know." Ryson could not help but chuckle at Lief's disposition. The stunned
expression and the gray pallor of his companion lightened the delver's mood
considerably. For the first time since they met, it was Lief who showed greater surprise at
the stirring events which had passed over them.
"Do not make light of this," the elf clamored. His rising emotions finally chased away
the gray pallor and restored a flush red to his cheeks.
"I'm not making light of this," Ryson said trying to bite back his smile. "But you
should see your face. It's getting red now, but before it was almost as white as hers."
Lief clenched his teeth but said nothing further.
Shayed beckoned for their attention once more.
"Both of your reactions are quite understandable," she said calmly. "I assure you, I am
glad to see both a representative of the delvers and the elves." She looked squarely at Lief
as if trying to recall his face. "What is your name?"
"I am Lief Woodson." The elf bowed slightly.
"I am pleased to meet you." Her voice lost some of its inherent warmth as she pressed
the elf for his knowledge. "Do you know what is happening here?"
"I know much less than I would like. We have found a breach in the wall of Sanctum.
It must break to the hollow for I can feel the magic flowing through the rift. That also
tells me that the sphere remains in Sanctum. As for why the breach exists or as to who
might have caused it, I can not say."
"No one is responsible for the breach," Shayed stated firmly. "The sphere itself has
broken through."
"That can not be!" the elf blurted out, but he caught his tongue quickly. "Forgive me, I
meant no disrespect. I just could not believe that that was possible. But if you say so, then
so it must be."
"You need not apologize, Lief Woodson. I understand your surprise, but rest assured it
is true. The sphere has used the power within it to break from its prison. It created the
quake to shift the mountain. At the same time, it discharged a powerful blast of energy
which created the opening in Sanctum."
"That would explain what I saw in the crevice," Ryson acknowledged. He placed a
hand to his chin as he recalled the sight of the cavern. As delver's are capable of doing, a
clear image came into his mind and he could see the inside of the tunnel with great detail.
"It wasn't man-made and the force came from within."
"Your senses are keen, delver," the apparition said with an even warmer expression.
"They will be needed, that is why I believe there are greater powers at work here."
"You talked about a higher purpose before," Ryson responded. His voice revealed his
skepticism about these greater powers, but for the moment, he turned upon his curiosities
of Shayed's appearance. "Before you start talking about how I'm needed, can you tell me
why you're here?"
Shayed answered without hesitancy. Her words held the conviction that made it clear
to Ryson of how she was able to lead the alliance of different races long ago. She spoke
with neither pride nor arrogance over her own importance. "I was responsible for
encasing the sphere within this mountain. I have come to understand that my decision
was neither right nor wrong. It simply delayed the inevitable. Perhaps, it allowed for a
time where the participants were better prepared for what they must face. Only time can
judge that matter.
"Regardless, the time has come. The sphere can no longer be entombed. There is
nothing which might hold it. With each day it becomes more aware of its surroundings. It
is slow to think, slower to react. That is why it took so many cycles of the seasons to
break free. It will not take as long if the same approach is taken. There is but one thing
that must be done. The sphere must be destroyed."
The mere mention of the destruction of the sphere extracted an animated response
from Lief. His own mind raced over the legends of elflore and how Shayed herself gave
her very life to prevent the wizards from doing what she now suggested. "Are you sure?"
Lief questioned with eyes nearly bulging. "I mean not to question you, but the Wizard
War? Was it not fought to prevent that very thing? What of the elves? Will they be safe
if the tainted magic is freed?"
"They are not safe now," Shayed replied with the first hint of sadness. The mention of
the war brought a flood of memories, of decisions long ago, actions when she was of
mortal body. She continued. "Nor is anyone safe. If it reassures you, it is my belief, no,
my acceptance that the destruction of the sphere will not mean the end of the elves. It is
the sphere which corrupts the magic, the sphere which creates the poison. If the sphere is
destroyed, so will be the poison."
"Your word is more than enough for me," Lief stated firmly. Any shred of doubt
evaporated with the conviction of Shayed's words. Lief now stood boldly willing to take
up the weight of any endeavor at the simple command of the spirit sorceress. "If you
command the sphere to be destroyed, then so it will."
"Now, wait a minute!" Ryson passed a glance at Lief. The issue of the sphere, the
momentary debate, and the final decision all seemed to pass him by. It was his own
question of Shayed's higher purpose that led to each, yet he remained as ill-informed as a
newborn. Sentence was past, and he remained uncertain of the very issue at hand. He
became almost as demanding in tone as Lief had displayed during their journey to
Sanctum. "Maybe all you need is the word of a spirit and you're off, but I still need to
know more about what in the name of Godson is going on here."
Shayed spoke patiently to the delver. "Your service is needed delver. The services of
all races, in fact. The sphere can no longer be held within this mountain or any other
mountain. It has gained enough awareness to realize it wishes to break free. There is
danger for everyone and everything. The sphere holds the power to destroy all life, to
decimate all races and end the eternal conflict."
"What conflict?" The delver grew frustrated. With every explanation, Shayed created
only more questions.
"The conflict between right and wrong, good and evil, happiness and sorrow; that is
the conflict I speak of. You must understand that the sphere works for neither side. In
effect, it has chosen the only other alternative between these struggles; oblivion. It works
for but one purpose, annihilation of everything."
"The sphere? In this mountain, the sphere wants to destroy everything?" Ryson's
disbelief was obvious.
"I understand your doubt." Her words rang with sincerity for such a thing seemed
almost unthinkable. "What is happening was never foreseen or foretold. Even more
disheartening, its final outcome remains unknown. Being of spirit form, I have had the
privilege to speak with powers that in different means have passed the prophesies to
earth. They all agree upon one thing, the sphere resists the influences of both sides. In
truth, there is nothing which will indicate how any of this may turn out. This one event
may yet be that which decides whether the struggle between good and evil continues or if
oblivion will take both sides."
"You aren’t making this any clearer to me."
Shayed spread her transparent arms to her sides. "Think of this land as the great
playing field where good and evil compete. It is an ongoing struggle. The prophecies talk
of these struggles and their ultimate outcome. Now, however, this land faces something
which might intervene, something which might end the struggle in the worst way.
Oblivion threatens to run over this land. It threatens to end the struggle with neither side
winning. It would mean the end of good, the end of evil, the end of everything. An
endless void, no life, no struggle. An option that is unacceptable."
"Can this be possible?" the delver questioned.
"Unfortunately, yes," Shayed emphasized. "It has been made possible by the
awareness which was created within the sphere. It is something I overlooked when I first
probed the energies. The sphere is neither the pawn of evil nor of good. It serves its own
purposes, and that is of oblivion. For some unknown reason, it wishes to end the
struggle."
"Let's say I understand everything you're saying. What are we supposed to do? I know
you said we had to destroy the sphere, but do you have any idea of just how we might do
that? I just got through inspecting the tunnel. It's blocked. There's a barrier that's
protecting the opening to the inside of this mountain. I don't think we're going to be able
to break through it."
"You could not break through it," Shayed acknowledged. "The sphere absorbed
powerful energies during the battle between the races and the magic casters. The force
field would be impenetrable."
"Well, that doesn't leave us many options. According to my friend here, this mountain
was designed so digging is out of the question. He said that even the dwarves couldn't
reach it through tunneling."
"That is also true."
Ryson continued to press the spirit for answers. "You aren't leaving us with any
choices here. And you still haven't answered my question. I'm not even sure how to
destroy this sphere, but even getting to it is going to be a problem. It might be
impossible."
"It is not impossible." Shayed spoke with certainty as she revealed the only true option
available. "You must reach the sphere by using the path which was originally created to
entomb it. You must travel down the five tiers. This is a path that the sphere will not be
able to block."
"It's already blocked," Ryson exclaimed. "According to elflore, the people that buried
this thing put in their own measures to prevent anyone from doing exactly what you want
us to do. I don't even know what's down there."
"That is why you must prepare for this quest. You must gather representatives from
the five races responsible for entombing the sphere." She took a moment to turn her
spiritual presence toward the inspiring view of the land. Her words became musical in
their conviction. "What has been broken must be mended. What has been forgotten must
be remembered. What you need to know and what you must have, all awaits you. It is a
time unequaled in history, a time when all powers can unite for a common goal. There is
much at stake, for both sides."
Her form circled back to the on looking elf and delver. "If this task frightens you, and
well it should, there are other aspects which must bring you strength. You are not alone.
Not you, Ryson Acumen as a delver, and not you, Lief Woodson, as an elf. Do not speak
of the barriers in this mountain as unbreakable. What barrier is stronger than the line
between life and death? I have crossed that barrier to seek you out, to alert you to what
you face. If I can do that, can you not cross the barriers placed within this mountain? And
what of your appearance here? You wish to overlook the guiding forces which have
certainly had a hand in this, but these forces still exist. If it is their will that you succeed,
then all of the magic in the sphere doubled, even tripled, could not stop you."
Ryson exhaled deeply. It did not sit well with him, this concept of divine selection. It
made him feel more like a pawn. He wished to believe he was here of his own choosing
or of mere coincidence. He attempted to clear his mind. He looked around and again his
senses seized that which was around him. He felt the warm sunshine on his face. He
smelled the clean air. As he inhaled, he noted a slight charge, the presence of magic, and
he realized the air was not as pure as he thought. Finally, he turned to his companion.
"It sounds as if we have no choice."
Lief looked deeply into the face of the delver. "Do you truly believe her words? Will
you accept this task?"
Ryson spoke as if condemned. "I know she's not lying. I don't know why. But yes, I
believe her and yes I'll accept this task, even though it seems impossible."
"That is good because I know she is Shayed. I knew it when I saw her. We must do as
she asks."
"I'm not arguing." Ryson forced a smile, hoping to reassure the elf before turning back
to the ghostly apparition. "I'll do whatever I can. It might help, though, if you give us an
idea of what to do first."
"It gives me strength to hear that," she answered with a great smile. "You must leave
me for now, you must realign the five races that once fought together to defeat Ingar and
the magic casters. An alliance is needed once more, and that is where you must begin.
You must seek the dwarves, the algors, and the humans. Once you have gathered what is
necessary to begin the quest, return to this spot. I will be waiting for you. Go now, you
have much to do."
"We shall go," Lief spoke with authority. He even bowed deeply. He spoke as if
chosen for hero's quest. "And we shall return."
Fool's quest was perhaps how the delver saw it, but Ryson kept his thoughts to himself
as Lief uttered a determined vow before they both descended Sanctum.
"We shall go first to my camp and I promise their assistance as well as all the elves.
We shall destroy the sphere."

Lief and Ryson descended Sanctum and made a hasty return to Dark Spruce Forest.
Again, at Lief's request, they traversed the forest by climbing through the branches. This
time Lief took the lead, and he sped through the trees without hesitation. His back to the
delver, the elf set a boisterous, ambitious pace. Taking longer leaps, avoiding thick pines
which might slow their path, and moving with fierce determination, Lief blazed a
southerly trail through the thick umbrage.
Ryson did not have to strain his abilities to maintain stride, but he noted the
unyielding desires of the elf. He wondered what Lief might do if he was unable to keep
up. He sincerely doubted that the elf would wait or even look back, so resolute were his
movements.
They did not converse as they had done on the previous trip through the forest, though
there was much Ryson wished to know. The delver caught glimpses of Lief's expression
and decided not to start a debate over the soundness of Shayed's request, or to question
the validity of ghosts in their world. Only the sounds of their travel broke the silence. For
now, even the squirrels and birds seemed to avoid them, as if the elf's fiery determination
was a danger to be avoided. The silence, the unanswered questions, the resulting
loneliness; all served only to lengthen the trip.
They traveled on for the rest of that day. Ryson's only diversion was to map their
movements in his mind, taking stock of small landmarks that scouts without his powerful
senses would surely miss. He calculated their length of travel, but while they crossed a
great portion of the forest, it remained evident that their journey was far from its final
destination. Ryson was aware of the breadth of this forest and his calculations placed
them a good distance from its heart.
They did not break at night, but continued through the dark. When the first light
glowed in the east, this section of the forest resisted the sun. The woods became thicker
as branches from neighboring trees intertwined to make continuous bridges. Leaping
from one tree to the next became unnecessary. Lief continued to lead and he stepped with
a quick pace over the sturdy branches. Their journey continued throughout that morning,
and the elf moved as if the long travel meant nothing to him. It became apparent that he
wished to reach his camp as soon as possible. He would accept no delay.
As any good delver would, Ryson made mental notations of their direction, the grade
of the ground below, and of different passages within the trees. Remembering the threat
of the undead and of the goblins, such a practice became more than scout related. If
retreat became necessary, he would be more than able to choose a path within the forest
which would yield the greatest safety. He took notice of all that surrounded him. He
sniffed the air, he put an ear to the wind, and he constantly watched for even the slightest
shadow of movement. Late in the morning, he noticed such signs and he whispered an
urgent warning to his companion.
"Lief! Get back here. Something's ahead of us. Five trees up and over to the right.
Ambush." The volume of his words was soft to conceal their meaning to the intruders,
but his tone was harsh, filled with alarm.
Lief did not stop nor did he whisper his response. He turned his head and replied
openly without fear of being overheard. "Do not fear. It is the guards of my own camp."
Before Lief could continue, several elves jumped upon him. They quickly disarmed
him and took hold of his arms and legs. Such was his surprise; he lacked the ability to
escape before they had firm hold. As his eyes widened with fiery emotion, he roared with
anger.
"What are you doing?! It's me!" Outraged, he spoke as if the action defied
explanation. "Free me at once! Have you lost your minds?!"
The other elves kept their grip firm. They would not release him even at his roaring
insistence.
Ryson quickly ascertained the situation. His head bobbed to the left and right, then
above. He saw movement circling about. They were tying to outflank him. Without
hesitation, he scampered further up the tree.
As he bolted, two elves from opposite sides leapt for his position. They did not expect
the speed of the delver and were left to grip only open air. Undaunted and believing their
own skills more than a match for their quarry, they recovered and followed.
Ryson paid little mind to those climbing after him. He continuously peered to
neighboring trees. He quickly spotted another guard standing in wait off to his right. He
leapt to his left to a clear tree. He climbed even higher and soon outdistanced the two
following him. With a higher perspective, he paused for but a moment as he scanned
everything below him. He pinpointed the locations of several more guards, and in an
instant, he chose a path which would lead him to the ground.
Six or seven elves closed upon the delver with overconfidence. Secure in their abilities
to scale the trees, they believed the chase over. In all of their past encounters, a treed
opponent was a captured opponent. They could not expect what would happen next, and
they gasped at the blur in which the delver moved.
Ryson shattered the elves' confidence as he dove downward with matchless speed. He
leapt quickly from branch to branch, descending the trees as if they were nothing more
than a staircase or a smooth and even ramp. Within two blinks of an eye, he was upon the
ground, a position where no elf could catch him.
If his speed confused the elves when he moved through the trees, it blinded them now.
He danced around the forest floor, making quick turns and using the cover of thick
trunks. Dashing in zigzagging fashion, he would not reveal his true direction. The treeborn elves had no chance of following.
Lief continued to struggle against those that held him, yet even he was silenced by the
maneuvering of the delver. After his companion appeared to retreat, he found his voice
and yelled out in anger.
"You fools! He was here to help!"
One of the elves which held him snarled with his own anger. "How can he help? You
brought a human to our camp."
"He's not human, he's a delver," Lief insisted. His own determination boiled over, and
with a mighty twist, he broke free. He faced the leader of the guards with obvious malice.
"Fire upon you! Do you know what you've done? Do you have any idea what's going on?
If he is gone, it may mean the end of us all."
Lief was about to strike out at the elf captain when Ryson's call from far below
checked his anger.
"I haven't left," the delver called out.
An elf low in the bough of a nearby tree caught a glimpse of the delver. Instinctively,
he pulled an arrow from his quiver, strung it, and sent it hurling toward the assumed
invader.
Ryson heard the arrow cut through the air. Reflexively, he ducked behind a thick tree
trunk and watched with disbelieving eyes as the arrow whisked by. It would have hit him
in the heart.
"One more like that and I will leave!" he yelled angrily.
"Hold, do not go!" Lief yelled before calling out an order to the other elves. "The rest
of you, cease your attack. Let the delver be."
"Why?!" the captain demanded. "He is an intruder. He is a threat. With all that is
going on we can not afford to take a chance!"
"What chance?" Lief replied heatedly. "The delver is with me. That should be more
than enough to allow him to pass."
"Is it?" the captain replied scornfully. "When has a human, or delver for that matter,
been allowed entry into our camp? Why should we allow it now?"
"Because I am telling you!"
"That means nothing! You have been gone. I am responsible for the protection of this
camp. You did not see what I had to witness. The slaughter of two young elves by river
rogues."
The response caught Lief off guard. He blurted out a questioning response. "River
rogues? Attacked the camp?"
"Yesterday!"
"That is unfortunate, but it is even more reason why we must not be detained. You
will let me pass, the delver as well."
The captain's face grew red. He was not accustomed to taking orders, but giving them.
"You will be detained as long as I wish!"
It was the delver that ended the battle of wills. He spoke with authority from his
position on the ground. He stepped out into the open with his own look of defiance,
daring the elves to give chase, or perhaps even fire another arrow. "Detaining us won't
help your cause. We know why the river rogues have returned. I'm not sure what they are,
but I can tell you they're not alone. I've faced the undead as well as goblins. We have
been to Sanctum. The mountain has been breached."
Momentary silence before a harsh reply.
"You may well lie!" the captain shot out a yell.
"Why should I?" Ryson demanded angrily. "I'd prefer to just take off now and forget
any of this ever happened. You couldn't stop me."
"Very well, then leave!"
"I can't do that. I spoke to Shayed."
Again, a hush fell over the guards. Indecision mounted.
"That's impossible," the captain finally replied.
"Is it? I bet you thought river rogues were impossible before yesterday, but they seem
to be back."
Lief spoke up again. His anger was now replaced with stony resolution. "This will end
now. The delver and I must speak with Mappel."
Lief said nothing more. He stepped by the guard captain. His movement made it clear
he would not accept being stopped again. He climbed down the tree and walked directly
to Ryson. He paid no attention to the other elves still in the trees.
"Fire upon the sphere," he said more to himself as he reached the delver. "So much is
happening; so many things changing. River rogues attacking elves again. Goblins in the
woods. I doubt there is any turning back now. I think our life in seclusion has ended."
"I can't say I completely understand what you're feeling, but I have some idea," Ryson
said and sadness tinged his voice. "It seems reality is now upside down for all of us."
"That much is true."
Suddenly, strangely, a look of pride warmed Lief's face. Such dramatic swings in
emotion were becoming even more common for the fiery elf. When he spoke, his words
reflected that same pride. "But keep in mind what we have seen this day. We have spoken
to Shayed! A privilege no one else can boast of. That in itself fills me with hope."
Ryson smiled at the elf's optimism. "I guess then we should get on with her wishes."
"Indeed. We will speak to Mappel. He is the eldest of the camp. He holds the elflore
and will instruct us."
Lief turned back to where the Elf guards had stopped him. He remained on the ground
and showed no sign of climbing a tree. He motioned for Ryson to follow.

Lief and Ryson walked deliberately across the forest floor. Lief led, keeping his eyes
forward. Back straight, shoulders squared, his gait revealed his defiance to any elf that
might consider stopping them. He stepped methodically over downtrodden paths where
underbrush had been beaten and crushed away by constant elfin travelers.
Ryson noted the paths with curiosity. He wondered why the elves would take to the
ground at this portion of the forest where the trees were yet numerous and intertwining
branches made continuous bridges from one to another. While there remained many elves
in the trees overhead, others watched below the branches, behind heavy trunks or bushes.
Ryson watched them all with a wary eye. He made particular note of those that carried
bows. For now, they made no threatening moves, but they remained as cautious as the
delver, and their numbers increased.
Ryson could only assume they were closing upon Lief's camp, but as of yet, he spotted
no cluster of huts. While he saw stocks of food at the bases of trees, and small burning
fires in deep holes, he saw no signs of a permanent camp. He wondered what an elfin
home might look like, whether it would be a sturdy shack constructed from boards of
wood, a hut of tangled branches and a thatched roof, or a tent spun of vines and leaves.
There appeared nothing to answer this question for he saw no signs of any large shelters.
He could not imagine how far they would have to walk to finally reach this camp, for
he saw nothing in the distance with his sharp eyes. Yet, he knew that the elfin guards
staked positions in this area and more and more elves moved about, both on the ground
and in the trees. In the end, he could not help but posing the question to Lief.
"Where is this camp of yours?"
"You are in it," Lief responded with casualness.
"This is your camp?" Ryson exclaimed with obvious surprise.
Lief laughed lightly as he continued walking. "What did you expect? A sprawling
town like those of the humans. We do not live like that. We have little need for gaudy
buildings. The forest provides us with everything we need. In return, we leave it as
undisturbed as possible."
"So you basically live out in the open?" Ryson questioned.
Lief showed no sign of insult. He spoke with continued good will, almost as if he
found the delver's reaction somewhat amusing. "Is that so surprising? Do the deer
construct their own houses, or the wolf, or the bird?"
"The wolves and birds do," Ryson replied. "The wolf digs a den and the bird makes a
nest."
"That is for the benefit of the young," the elf insisted. "We do the same. We build
shelters out of branches. We place them in the trees and upon the ground. We use them to
protect our children and to store our more delicate items. But they are only temporary.
They can be dismantled and moved in a moment's notice. Like that one there."
The elf pointed to an orderly arrangement of thick branches which formed a small
tent-like structure upon the ground. Its top barely reached Ryson's waist. It stood against
a large cherry tree which assisted in support and added an umbrella of leaves overhead.
"That particular shelter holds the wild cherries harvested from that tree. We have
found that keeping them under cover preserves them and protects them from birds."
"What about the dormant season?" Ryson wondered aloud. "Don't you get cold?"
"After the last harvests, we become more like the bear and the squirrel. We build more
shelters but we also become less active. There is no sense wasting energy when food is
scarce. We will build small fires at night and feed upon stored nuts. We simply wait for
the growing season to begin the cycle anew."
"That's a tough life." the delver remarked. He considered those without a warm
fireplace and a thick roof over their heads as less fortunate.
"Is it? Or is that just your point of view? A point of view which does not sound that of
a purebred delver. You might have been living with the humans for too long, Ryson
Acumen. Perhaps we live as we were all supposed to live. It may very well be that the
lives of humans, and the delvers that choose to follow, are the truly tough lives, as you
put it. I would think it may be more difficult to try and ignore the seasons, to continue as
if nothing changed from the growing season to the dormant season. Yet, isn't that what
humans attempt to do? They build towns and roads so that their lives remain
uninterrupted. They work the same amount throughout the cycles of the season. There is
no period of hibernation, no time to rejuvenate. Perhaps, this is the difficult life."
Lief paused as he focused upon the figure of an elf leaning upon a long, thick branch.
Lief's face became etched with shadows as he considered the point of their return.
"Enough of that for now. It is time to concentrate on the struggle at hand. Come with
me."
He motioned for Ryson to follow as he approached the other elf.
Ryson stepped cautiously and remained slightly behind his companion. The elf
holding the branch appeared much older than Lief. Remembering how long elves lived,
Ryson could not imagine how many cycles this one had seen. He concluded that this must
be the elf elder, Mappel, which Lief spoke of.
Mappel stared out into the trees even as Lief moved near. He made no sign of
acknowledging either of the two. He even showed no stir of agitation at the approach of a
delver, an obvious stranger to this camp. His stare was neither vacant nor cold. His eyes
held a twinkle of life, even if they seemed ignorant to the advance of a stranger.
Mappel stood erect. While the hands of time etched their work as lines in the elf's
face, it could not yet bend Mappel's bones. A long flowing forester's cloak covered
Mappel's figure. His hair, a mixture of charcoal, gray and silver, hung limply from his
head. The thin wisps had lost their texture over time and could not hide his pointed ears.
The long branch, straight as a hand-drawn line, served as a staff for the elder elf, and
he leaned upon it with great reliance. Ryson judged the branch to be slightly taller than
Mappel and of stout thickness. Each end was flat and most of the bark had been
smoothed away, either by time or by the caresses of Mappel's hands. The elf held to the
branch with comfortable ease as if the staff was now simply an extension of his arm.
Lief reached out and grasped the branch several lengths below where Mappel's hand
gripped it.
Upon Lief's touch of the staff, the elder was almost startled into awareness of the two
before him. He blinked once, than twice. He looked over the delver with great curiosity.
His own expression quickly became shadowed. He offered no greeting. Instead, he spoke
as if continuing a previous conversation.
"It was not enough for you to reject the magic as a blessing of the land," the elder elf
rattled. "You insisted with your doubts. Now the land is heavy with danger. What have
you brought upon us, Lief Woodson?"
"It is not I that has brought anything upon us," Lief replied. At first his voice betrayed
his annoyance with the elder, but he quickly gritted his teeth and toned down his
emotions. "It is impossible to say what is responsible for the fate we now face, but I bring
you news of both darkness and light. As I warned the camp previously, the sphere is
again radiating its tainted magic upon the land. It is not, however, in the hands of an
enemy. It is the sphere itself that has broken from its own entombment. It remains in
Sanctum, yet it has managed to create a break through the very side of the mountain.
Through some dark power unexplained to me, the sphere has gained an awareness of its
captivity and refuses to be encased any longer. It will bring oblivion to the land."
Mappel rotated his hands about the long branch in his grasp. His words expressed his
doubt over the younger elf's story. "You have gathered much information in a short time,
information which seems beyond your abilities. How is this possible?"
"There are two major factors." Lief's voice quickly brimmed with pride as he revealed
the encounter with the elfin sorceress. "The most important being that I have spoken with
the spirit of Shayed. She has explained the awareness of the sphere and its refusal to be
encased within the mountain. That is how I can be sure of the fate we face."
The elder elf appeared greatly mystified by this explanation. He leaned upon his
branch with greater reliance as if the weight of this revelation staggered his balance. His
eyes narrowed and his head tilted as his expression communicated his expectation of
further explanation.
Lief gladly continued. "Shayed has told us that the sphere remains out of the hands of
any enemy. Its effect upon our land is based solely upon its own will. It is the land's
misfortune that the sphere has gained its awareness. It works for neither good nor evil. It
simply wishes the total extinction of all life. As to why, I can not explain."
Mappel took no time to mull over the possibilities. Instead, he questioned Lief further.
"You said there were two factors which aided in your retrieval of this information," he
noted almost harshly. "What is the other?"
Lief presented Ryson with a wave of his hand. "He stands beside me now. I came
across a delver as I traveled toward Sanctum. His name is Ryson Acumen. I found him
locked in a struggle with one of the undead. When I learned he was full-bred delver, I
sensed the hands of fate bringing us together."
"Do not be quick to judge what might be fate," Mappel interrupted. "These are
uncertain times. We have no idea what forces may or may not be at work. But continue
with your explanation."
"Fate or not," Lief conceded, "that I can not say, but I can say that Ryson Acumen was
indeed a boon to my travel. We agreed to follow the path of the quake which initiated
these troubled times. It led us, as I suspected, to Sanctum. His powerful senses detected a
group of goblins. With his help, we captured one and found that the goblins were not
responsible for the freeing of the sphere."
Ryson suddenly felt the urge to help with the explanation. In listening to the story, he
himself found it unbelievable even though he experienced everything described.
Knowing the severity of what they faced, Ryson felt it essential to convince the elder elf.
"What he says is true," the delver exclaimed. "I did fight what he calls one of the
undead. I couldn't believe it myself at the time, but it tried to kill me. We also fell upon
goblins and captured one. I have one of their swords. You see." Ryson held up the crude
short sword for the elder elf.
Mappel showed no interest in the weapon. His eyes fell upon the delver and spoke
with a voice so crisp, it defied his age.
"Do not feel as if you must prove something to me. I still have eyes and ears. I see,
hear and feel what is happening. I might not have accepted the truth at first. I hoped that
the magic might have returned naturally, but now I am sure that it is the work of the
sphere. That means the return of goblins, among other things."
"You believe now?" Lief asked with his hope rising.
"Much has happened during your absence, Lief Woodson. The magic has grown
within us. Though it may be difficult to accept, I know you, and I know you have no
reason to lie. Your story corresponds with much of what has already happened here.
Those gifted have even been able to cast minor spells. The magic, unfortunately, is not
pure. I am not so old that I can't sense the poison within it. It will undo us all. If the
magic has returned, then why not Shayed? There is also the matter of the river rogue and
the fate of the two unfortunate elves. Now, you return to me with continued proof. As
much as I would like, I can not deny the tragedy which faces us."
"It may not have to be a tragedy. Remember, we have spoken with Shayed," Lief
reminded him with words trimmed in pride and optimism. "It is her counsel that we
might yet defeat this thing which now haunts us."
Mappel found only small reassurance. He spoke more of his growing confusion. "The
return of Shayed, even in spirit form, fills me with hope. It appears as if this is indeed a
momentous time, a time which may decide the fates of many. Yet, this all remains so
distressing. It distresses me that elflore gave no foreshadowing of this event. The return
of Shayed signifies a time which must be of great importance. Why must we face this
without a shred of help from the lore?"
Lief hesitated for a moment, but finally forced himself to speak.
"There is more which you might find troubling, Mappel. We will not be able to simply
bury the sphere. It is the word of Shayed that this will no longer be allowed. She makes
other requirements of us. In truth, she commands that we destroy the sphere."
The words lingered in a moment of silence, stabbed at the elder and drew his ire.
"Were those her words or yours?!" Mappel questioned sternly, hissing like a startled
rattler.
Lief stood his ground. His eyes remained upon the elder, but his voice dropped in
tone. "They were hers." It was apologetic in its offering.
Mappel remained unsatisfied and eyed Lief questioningly. "You know the story of
Shayed. During the Wizard War she defied the magic users because she would not
destroy the sphere. Now, you tell me differently. This does not follow with elflore. Does
Shayed truly advise the destruction of the sphere?"
Lief could answer no differently. "Yes, she does."
The elder elf, filled with disbelief, turned to Ryson. "What do you say to this, delver?"
Mappel demanded. "Were you present? Did Shayed truly order the destruction of the
sphere?"
Although he found Mappel's outburst most disquieting, Ryson answered with the
simple truth. "Yes, she did."
The elder gripped his branch slightly tighter and grumbled something unknown to
Ryson. He ripped his sight from the two that stood before him and his eyes bore into the
trees. He thumped his staff twice against the ground in revolt against what had been told
to him.
Ryson and Lief waited quietly before him. The delver remained uncertain of what to
do or say. He looked to Lief who stood, more or less, patiently waiting for Mappel.
After his momentary display of resistance, Mappel fell completely into acceptance of
what he viewed as nothing less than a tragedy.
"Then so it must be done," he sighed, his shoulders sagged with the weight of the
revelation.
Mappel turned the prospect over in his mind. As if condemned to a sentence of hard
labor, he faced it with a will to begin as soon as possible in order to end it as soon as
possible. "To destroy the sphere we must reach it first. You say it is still within Sanctum.
What of this breach? Can we use it to reach the sphere?"
"No," Lief replied flatly. "The sphere protects the opening with a force barrier. The
magic may exit, but we may not enter."
The elder dropped his head in frustration.
Lief continued. "Shayed advises us to use the tiers as a path to the sphere. It can not be
blocked by any power the sphere might induce."
"The tiers are protected in other ways," Mappel shook his head.
"I know, but we have no other choice."
"You realize what this means?"
"We must enlist the help of the other races," Lief began, again sounding apologetic,
but when he recalled his own encounter with the spirit of Shayed, unyielding
determination filled his voice. "I realize the weight of this matter, but it is also what
Shayed commands."
"Shayed may command, but it may not be all within our power," Mappel spoke with
sadness. "We must depend on the assistance of others for this request. The tiers have
proven to be the divisive matter surrounding all the races. To break the secrets of the tiers
is to break centuries of an accepted settlement that led to the new order. This can not be
done easily."
"It will have to be done," Lief insisted.
"You speak as if we can snap our fingers and it will be so," Mappel lectured. "You
have no idea of what we face. Not only must we convince others to join our cause, we
must defeat the barriers themselves. Although I know only of what the elves placed
within Sanctum, I know that passing this will not be easy. I can only imagine what other
horrors might await. The tiers were constructed so that no one might reach the power of
the sphere."
"Do we have another choice?" Lief questioned. "Forgive me, if I appear impudent, but
I see little value in debating the issue. We must do what we must do."
"It is not only up to us," Mappel countered. "The barriers of Sanctum are beyond the
unity of elves. They represent the separation of the five races, and thus, they include the
five races. Just because you and I might say Sanctum must be entered does not mean
others will agree."
"It is not just you or I," Lief reminded, "it is Shayed as well."
"So it is," Mappel allowed, "and perhaps it is time to break the symbol of the pact
which separates the races. I don't know how we might accomplish such a thing, but if it is
the command of Shayed, it must be attempted."
"Excuse me, sir," Ryson finally spoke. He found the exchange between the two elves
interesting and enlightening, but the near defeatist attitude of Mappel puzzled him. As he
questioned Mappel, his voice carried in low tones, hoping to remain as inoffensive to the
elder as possible. "I can't claim to know much of what you're talking about, but it sounds
as if you're dooming this before we even get started. Will it be so difficult?"
Mappel turned his disheartened glance upon the delver. He answered with grace.
Though his response was lacking in detail, he made a genuine attempt to answer the
delver with all honesty. "If you must ask, I must reply that it will be far more difficult
then you can comprehend. It is not simply the barriers we must overcome, but the ages of
mistrust and separation."
"Well, that may be," Ryson countered. "I really don't understand any of this fully, but
I've continued along with what I've seen and heard so far. That may not be much, but
consider what I have seen. I didn't know of elves or goblins before. Today, I saw a ghost
for Godson's sake. I haven't walked away yet."
"You are a delver," Mappel reminded. "It is your natural instinct to follow anything
which is new and unknown to you. Take my word; it will not be as easy to convince
others to assist in this task. The stakes are very high, as is the mistrust."
"So high that others won't realize we all have to work together?"
"That is the point. The races no longer work together. That has been the way. Even the
threat of total extinction may not allow for a change."
Ryson remained unconvinced that their plight deserved such skepticism as to ring a
death bell before they even began. He simply would not accept such a pessimistic
outlook. If he had, he would have given up on his own sanity at the first encounter with
the walking dead.
"How can you sound so sure?" he questioned.
Mappel answered as if reading from history. He spoke with a gaze that spread across
the forest. "I can be sure for I have seen the changes over time. I have seen the new order
evolve and I have seen the races move further apart. To change this would be more
difficult than reversing the flow of tens of rivers. It is the reversal of a path which
occurred long ago. In a time you might not be able to imagine, this land held magic. The
magic was the common denominator for the different races. They lived in the land aware
of each other's presence. They worked together, traded and respected each other's
existence. They held a common enemy in the dark creatures.
"All this ended, however, when the sphere was buried in Sanctum Mountain. The
things which kept the races together were gone. There remained nothing which they
might hold as common. There was no longer a common foe and there was no longer the
link of magic. Distrust appeared almost immediately. The very creation of the sphere was
such a consequential event; it changed the very fiber of our existence. It led to the new
order of things, an order which has been in place for a very long time. It will not be so
easy to undo."
Ryson appeared undeterred by Mappel's words. "If the creation of the sphere could
create such a situation, then maybe it is exactly the destruction of the sphere which is
needed to change it."
"But in order to destroy the sphere we must end the separation. Do you not see the
paradox?" Mappel questioned.
"I see it. We need to destroy the sphere to bring back common ties among the races,
but we need for the races to come together to destroy the sphere. It's a circle. I'm aware of
that, but we have to enter the circle at some point."
"That is where the very problem lies."
"It's only a problem if we make it one," Ryson insisted. "You seem to be willing to
accept what we have to do. How can you be so sure others will not?"
"Because elves have remained in contact with the dwarves. I know of their
stubbornness. I also know of the humans. They wish to ignore the history of the legends.
They live without knowledge of the other races."
"Very few are stubborn when their lives are at stake," Ryson countered. "I've noticed
that before. I suggest we get them to realize what's going on. You spoke of changing the
course of a river. Maybe you should compare it to changing the tide of the ocean. The
tide has been going out, but now it's time for it to come back in. It's just like everything
else. It takes time, but it does happen."
Mappel raised an eyebrow. His face softened, lines of age seemed to disappear
miraculously. He even allowed a smile to cross his thin lips. "This is the second time I
have been comforted this day. First, I hear of Shayed's return. Now, I hear a delver
advising me of what I should already know. Thank you.
"Lief has done well to find you. You instill within me a faith that we might complete
the impossible." The transformation of the elder elf continued, now both in his tone and
in his expression. The self-doubt vanished, replaced with confidence and a willingness to
grasp hold upon the hope held out by the delver. His eyes and his voice now held a fire
which was known to Lief but not yet seen by Ryson.
As Mappel spoke, his words now echoed across the forest. Other elves looked to them
with growing curiosity. "We must now feed a fire which must burn to save ourselves as
well as the land, but there is much more we all must do. Our path is now chosen. We
must send forth representatives to speak with the dwarves. They will be the easiest to
gain an audience. The humans will be the most difficult. They might not even accept our
very existence."
"Won't they have to if you come out of hiding?" Ryson questioned. The thought of
elves walking down the streets of Burbon or Pinesway was all too vivid in his
imagination. Such a sight would certainly cause a stir and raise the curiosity of all.
"Hmmph," Mappel exhaled almost indignantly. "You may live with the humans, but I
see I understand them better. They have grown arrogant in an age where they assume
they are the superior race. It will not do them well to find otherwise. They will resist such
knowledge. I don't know if they even carried the ancient knowledge with them. We may
never find a single human with the knowledge of their own part in the Wizard War."
"Let's not get too pessimistic about that, either," Ryson advised. "I know of people
that keep close ties with what we call the legends. In fact, I was sent out by Reader
Matthew to investigate the origins of the quake. He is the leader of the Church of Godson
at Connel."
"Connel? Does that mean you also come from Connel?" Mappel asked.
"Yes, it does. Lief already told me of how Connel was the place of the final battle in
the fight for the sphere. He thought it might mean something that I come from there.
Respectfully, I think it's just coincidence."
Mappel's expression revealed his interest at the delver's remark. "Who is to say
whether it means anything or not? It may be as you say or it may be more. Indeed, we
have nothing to guide us. Thus, it is not wrong to grasp at even the slightest hope that
other powers are at work. Whatever the case, I believe Connel to be significant in this
matter. Connel is where the five races made their stand together, and it will be the place
where we shall rejoin."
Ryson's eyebrows flipped upwards. "Are you sure about that?! Connel is a place
where the people don't exactly warm to strangers, let alone strange things. They're going
to have a hard time accepting elves just walking into town."
"They will have to accept more than that," Lief stated fervently. "Wait until they see
the dwarves, or the algors for that matter."
"That's just what I mean," Ryson explained. "Don't you think a less conspicuous place
would be better for such a meeting?"
"No. It must be Connel," Mappel spoke with a newfound determination. He accepted
the cause with all his heart and soul. He would move forward now with all the intensity
he could muster. "Its potential importance is too critical to overlook. The other races may
even be more willing to help fight a common foe when faced with reminders of our last
joint battle. We shall bring all the races back together within the confines of the ancient
wall which saved us so long ago. As for the humans, they will simply have to accept what
they see. The world as they know it is finished no matter what happens. Either the sphere
will destroy all life or we shall destroy the sphere. In that case, the magic will return and
the land will revert to how it was during the time of elflore."
"I guess so," Ryson said reluctantly. His image of elves walking through a human
town re-entered his mind, but now he saw them in the familiar streets of Connel. He
wondered how those he had come to know would react to such a sight.
"It is how it must be," Mappel stated firmly. "Now, about this Reader Matthew. He is
versed in the book of Godson?"
The question brought Ryson's attention away from his personal thoughts. "I would
have to say so. My guess is he is the best hope at finding someone who might know what
the humans placed in Sanctum as protection. If he doesn't, I don't know who will."
"I shall see him myself. Lief shall accompany me."
Both Ryson and Lief displayed great surprise and concern.
"You're going to go to Connel?" Ryson questioned.
"Do not be alarmed. I may be old, but I still can travel. This is an important time for
us. It is my responsibility. If it calms you, we shall remain inconspicuous. We can appear
to be just as humans. No one will know of us until we locate the reader. We will disclose
ourselves only to him."
"Are you sure of this?" Lief asked.
"I have no choice. It is my place. It is also your place. You have spoken to Shayed.
Without aid of elflore, we must choose the obvious. It may have only been chance that it
was your lot to come across the delver in the woods, but it might just as easily have been
the guiding hand of fate. In some unknown manner, you have been selected to play a role
in this event."
"What about me?" Ryson wondered aloud. "Does my part end here? Do I go with you
to Connel? I promised to send word to Reader Matthew. If I accompany you, I can report
to him directly. I might also help explain what's going on."
Mappel shook his head, but eyed the delver with veiled expectations. "If Matthew is
indeed a follower of Godson, we will not need you to explain. As for your part, I don't
believe it is over. That, however, is up to you. I would have a task for you that is both
important and dangerous. Whether you feel it to be your role, that is up to you."
The weight of Mappel's gaze fell heavily upon the delver, and Ryson almost hesitated
in asking the obvious question. His delver instincts, however, would not allow him to
remain quiet.
"What is it you want me to do?"
"As I have said before, I will send word to the dwarves about this matter. That will
need no special messenger. They will hear my word and I am sure they will understand.
They will send representatives to Connel. The algors are another matter. They are a
strange group. They live by their own accord. I never claimed an understanding of them.
In truth, I wouldn't know how to find them. I know they live in the desert south by
southwest of our camp. That, unfortunately, is the extent of my knowledge. But here I
find myself graced with a delver, a purebred delver, and by elflore I know it is within you
to find anything that might be hidden. I can advise you on what to look for, what to sense.
With your abilities, you have the greatest chance of locating them."
Ryson's eyes widened at the suggestion. A loose description from the legends of an
algor filled his mind. It left much to his imagination, and even more to disbelieve. "I've
never even seen an algor before. Even if you tell me what to look for, it's not going to be
easy. The desert is a tricky place. The wind and the sand can play tricks. Even if I do find
them, what then? I don't even know what language they speak."
"They speak the same as ours," Mappel answered simply.
"But what will I say to them?"
"What you must, what you have already said. You have convinced me that the time of
change is at hand. Use the same emotion. Tell them all you have seen and heard, and I
mean everything. Do not leave out a single item because you might fear it is too
outlandish. The truth is that the algors may agree to meet us if your story is curious
enough. Do not ask me to explain it. As I said before, they are a strange group. The more
eccentric the story, the more inclined they are to look into it. It is how elflore describes
them."
"You also said this might be dangerous. Are you talking about the algors?"
"No, the algors will not harm you. They will either hide from you or simply ignore
you. That is not where the danger lies. In reaching the desert, you must cross territory
which is now certainly inhabited by mountain shags and river rogues. That is the danger
you face."
"I see." Ryson rubbed his chin as he considered the proposal.
"Do not feel forced into this matter, Ryson Acumen," Mappel counseled. "Look
deeply into yourself. Let your own feelings dictate your answer."
And he did address his feelings. This day he walked within the camp of elves, spoke
with an elfin leader. Now, the exquisite opportunity of chasing another legend opened
before him, something previously beyond his imagination. As a delver, he simply could
not turn away.
"My own feelings tell me to go," Ryson admitted, answering not only Mappel's
request, but the doubts in his own mind. "Not because I don't fear the danger, because I
do. It's because as a delver I wish to find an algor. If I reject this, I would regret it. That
much I'm sure of. Maybe this is my chance to finally prove that I'm not really mad, that
this really is happening."
"He should not face it alone," Lief insisted. "He will not know how to deal with what
he might encounter. Let me go with him. You do not need me in your travel. A guard will
suffice."
Mappel shook his head sternly. "Your lot is cast, Lief Woodson. But I agree he should
not face the dangers alone. I will send a guard with him. I will send Holli Brances." The
elder elf paused. He considered a gnawing thought echoing through his own mind. He
spoke of it almost as if the thought defied logic. "I also realize that a short sword taken
from a goblin will not help him. He shall take the Sword of Decree. It will be needed in
times yet to come, and perhaps it is foolish of me to give it to him. Risking its loss when
it is truly needed seems more than foolish. For some reason, though, I sense it is
necessary."
"The Sword of Decree?" Ryson looked confused.
"A powerful weapon," Mappel responded. "A weapon thats purpose was forged at the
time of Sanctum. A weapon which will be needed again if we are to succeed. However, I
sense an intertwining of events, and I believe it must go with you now."
"It is a great honor he bestows upon you," Lief added. "The sword has not been
carried in battle or in defense as long as I have lived."
"The truth is that it was created just after the Wizard War," Mappel emphasized. "The
sword is enchanted. It has been held in reserve for an occasion of dire need. Its time of
service has come, and it will be needed for us to reach our objective."
"I thought the sphere held all the magic?" Ryson remained confused. "How can the
sword still be enchanted?"
Mappel offered a simple explanation. "The sphere took that energy which was free. It
could not pull the power from items which held it inertly. That is why the sword
remained unused for so long. It can hold its power for an eternity. As it is used, however,
the power will dwindle. The enchantment can not be recharged as long as the magic in
the air remains tainted. Each time the sword is used it will lose a portion of its
enchantment."
Another hundred questions erupted in the delver's mind. He blurted out the first, his
curiosity apparent. "How do you use this sword?"
"Like any other sword, but with greater energy. When it touches your foe, it will do
far more than cut or stab. It will unleash power that will burn the very soul."
Here, Ryson's curiosity faded into aversion.
"I don't know if I want such a sword," Ryson stated seriously.
It was Mappel's turn to reveal confusion. To bestow the sword was to bestow honor.
He could not imagine why someone would refuse. "I do not understand."
"I don't want to use anything that's going to burn someone's soul," Ryson admitted
without shame. He did not wish to insult the elder or the honor, but the sword was simply
beyond his desires. "I wasn't happy with carrying the short sword."
Lief spoke up, now with greater authority. "Your mind might change when you face a
river rogue. It would not show you the same kind of mercy. There are simply times when
you must act with force."
Ryson stood firm to his principles. The thought of holding such a sword left him ill at
ease. As a delver, it was always easy to identify danger before stumbling upon it, or to
dodge threats as he dodged the arrow of the elf guard earlier that day. He understood
defensive procedures, but shied away from any offensive undertaking.
"I can understand people protecting themselves," he explained, "but I don't agree with
going out with the intention of killing. I can't believe you would want me to go out with
that attitude."
Lief spoke coldly. "I realize that you may not understand this, but yes we would. Right
now, you are still looking at things as if the world you knew was still intact. It is not."
"If you're talking about indiscriminate killing," Ryson responded quickly, "I doubt my
feelings on that will ever change. I was taught to respect life, all life. Even if I have to
accept the existence of goblins, river rogues and even elves, you can't expect me to give
up my values."
"Your values are based on a reality which will soon change greatly."
Mappel waved his hand making it clear he wanted the debate to end.
"I understand your values are important," the elder allowed. "They make you what you
are. I doubt anyone will expect you to change them, but your perspective must change.
You must accept what is about to happen."
Ryson spoke undeterred of his position. "There is still right and wrong, good and
evil."
"Yes there is. Even more so now. The evil which lurks in the wilderness may strike at
you horribly. I do not ask you to hunt this evil down. I ask you to carry the sword and use
it to protect yourself. Use it to make sure your task succeeds. It might mean the end of
everything if you fail."
"What about this Holli person. Can't you give her the sword?"
Mappel reflected upon the suggestion for long moments. "I can, if you insist, but then
I will have to make a request of my own. I offer the sword for your protection not hers. If
you wish her to carry it, you must always remain at her side. Do you agree to this?"
Ryson found the option acceptable. "Sure."
Mappel did not allow this reply to end the discussion until he made one more request.
"You must also vow to protect the sword, as it will protect you. Use it when necessary,
but not with disregard. If something should happen to Holli, you must take up the sword.
It must then never leave your side. I can not speak further of this. You simply must
accept that if the sword is lost, so are we all."
"If it's that important maybe you should hold onto it." Ryson offered.
"I believe it must go with you. Do you accept this responsibility?"
Ryson nodded.
"Very well," Mappel spoke as if the matter was concluded. "Lief, summon Holli
Brances. She will receive the sword and guide our new friend toward the desert. It will be
a difficult path through the forest. It remains thick in that direction."
"Do not fear for him on that," Lief stated as he turned to fulfill Mappel's request. "He
climbs as well, perhaps even better than I."
"That is high praise indeed. Come now, delver, it is time for me to tell you all I know
of the algors."
"Before you do, I have one more question for you. It seems to me we're forgetting one
piece of the puzzle."
"Which might that be?"
"The delvers," Ryson admitted. "Even if Reader Matthew can help us with the
humans, and I can convince the algors, we still have no idea what my people put in
Sanctum. I can't even tell you who to ask."
"I see." Mappel paused as he closed his eyes to think for long moments before
continuing. "Let us not fret upon that now. I will see what the reader can tell me and we
shall see how you fare with the algors. As for the delvers, you are here with us at this
moment. That is enough for now. We will deal with the puzzles of Sanctum when we
bring others together. Perhaps, Matthew will help us with this problem."
Ryson only shrugged.

Holli Brances moved alongside Ryson as they headed toward the Lacobian desert. She
obviously took Mappel's request seriously for she remained ever within arm’s reach. The
Sword of Decree remained sheathed at her side, but Ryson knew it would take her less
than a second to wield it against any potential foe.
Ryson made a point of watching Holli closely when she was first introduced to him. If
Ryson's life would be dependant upon this elf, he wished to know as much about her as
possible. As only a delver would, he examined her movements, expressions and replies.
He realized immediately that her personality was as diametrically opposed to Lief
Woodson's as possible. Where Lief's emotions would burst forth, Holli remained stable
and controlled. Lief had previously showed signs of humor, but Holli remained stoic and
reserved. Ryson would never forget the look in Holli's face when Mappel presented her
with the sword. She barely breathed as she took possession, and a smile dared not crack
her lips. She held it with the care a mother holds a newborn, but not with the same
emotion. She said not a word. She only nodded her head as if willingly accepting some
Herculean task.
Holli Brances looked very much like an average human female, except of course for
her pointed ears. She stood tall and slender, but no more than some of the appearance
conscious girls from Connel. In truth, her most distinguishable characteristic was her
darting eyes. Even when resting, her eyes flashed about constantly, drinking in every
surrounding image. She took nothing for granted. She looked about, scanned the horizon,
and watched for the slightest movement in all directions. One pass was evidently
insufficient, for this surveillance continued unendingly.
Unable to ignore this trait, Ryson found the habit catchy. After but a few moments
with the elf guard, he too, began to constantly scan his surroundings. Such diligence
became strenuous as the two ventured further southward.
The forest increased in its density. Thick branches overwhelmed the travelers, limiting
their movements and choice of paths. It also restricted their visibility which obviously
discomforted the elf. She twisted and turned her neck with greater speed, hoping to offset
the limited sight distance with a quicker review of everything around her.
Ryson considered making conversation to ease her discomfort, but he quickly realized
such an action would only compound her difficulties. He knew that his questions or
comments would be viewed as a distraction. He remained quiet, concentrated on finding
the quickest and easiest path through the trees.
Holli did eventually speak, but only to request a slower pace. She could not keep up
with him if he concentrated solely upon movement. That would mean she could not fulfill
her obligation of protecting him. Every time he began to pull away, she rebuked him,
almost ordering him to remain within her grasp.
The remainder of this long day ended as the final light of dusk disappeared. Holli
requested they remain in the trees for the night and Ryson did not object.
They barely spoke. She told the delver to sleep the entire night. She would take the
whole watch. She made some reference about being trained to rest while remaining
awake. Indeed, a highly trained elf guard could go unencumbered for several days
without actual sleep. They only needed breaks from strenuous activity. Holli found such a
break as she perched herself between two thick boughs of a large oak tree.
Ryson bent back the branches of a soft blue spruce, tying them together to create a
make-shift hammock. He sprawled out without fear of falling and drifted into a deep
sleep. When he woke, he could not recall a single dream.
Holli woke the delver at the first light of day. They both used the new light to inspect
the surrounding area. Ryson even dropped to the ground to check for signs of intruders.
Holli followed him unhappily. She did not wish to leave the trees, but she could not
forget her duty to remain at his side. Nothing was found, and they decided to move
forward. They were traveling again before the sun rose above the tree line.
Ryson kept them moving at the quickest pace Holli could follow. To his pleasure and
surprise, she showed no signs of fatigue from the lack of sleep. They moved southwest
and she made no complaints over his speed. If anything, she seemed more apt to follow
the delver as if she spent the night preparing for the task, both mentally and physically.
Their diligence paid off as the trees became more diluted. The dire heaviness of the
forest began to lift. Pines and deciduous trees spread themselves further apart. Their
travel quickened, unencumbered by the stifling forest. Before them, thick branches
formed long bridges in nearly every direction. As the number of trees dwindled, the space
around them opened. Holli found it easier to survey the encompassing grounds, her eyes
swept across the landscape with broad scans.
The heightened senses of the delver grasped the forest's weakening hold in the
direction they set. The soil content below them was becoming rocky and dry. Moisture in
both the air and the ground was fading. The trees showed signs of a greater struggle to
reach the sky. Browning leaves and withering branches were a testament to the harsher
environment of the desert that waited well ahead of them.
The Lacobian desert remained far off, they would still have to travel the sparsely
vegetated and rocky hill regions which separated the forest from the desert, but by all
accounts, they should reach the outskirts before late afternoon.
Before the sun was overhead, they were forced from the trees. To Holli's dismay, this
form of travel was no longer possible. The trees grew too far apart for them to leap from
branch to branch. They tried for a while and each showed the leaping ability of the
nimblest of squirrels. The soil, however, became dryer with each passing step. The forest
thinned to a cluster of trees and then a smattering. Soon, the landscape was nothing more
than rocky terrain spotted with more sagebrush than healthy trees.
Holli reluctantly accepted the inevitable and they trotted upon open ground. Only the
increased range of her vision gave her any solace. Without the thick forest to block her
view, she could see far off to the horizon in each direction. She remained cautious and at
her urging they shied away from the steeper of the hills or any large boulders. She
directed them in a path that would keep them in areas of little cover.
Ryson questioned that tactic as he recalled the weapons of the goblins. Walking
through the open ground left them vulnerable to crossbow fire. He asked if they might be
safer keeping close to the hillsides. She disagreed flatly.
Holli knew the path she chose left them without protection, but it also reduced the
chance of ambush. This was her greatest fear. She knew enough of elflore and listened
well to Mappel's advice. The goblins did not pose a true threat in this area. They hated the
dryness of the desert, perhaps almost as much as the elves. Thus, she did not fear an
attack from crossbows. If they were to be assaulted now, it would be by creatures that
cared little for using arrows.
She explained no further and they continued forward. They made excellent time and
the scent of the dry desert air soon became clear even to Holli.
Upon a high clearing, Ryson squinted his eyes and peered across the horizon. In the
far distance, the sparsely vegetated hills and rocky terrain were replaced by sandy dunes.
Tall cacti reached toward the sky. They numbered more in the distance, but a few jutted
up from the land they now traversed. Ryson examined the ground and saw more signs of
sand accumulating among the rocks and gravel.
"The hard ground is starting to give way to the desert," he exclaimed. "Pretty soon
we'll be walking on pure sand. Can you see it in the distance?"
"Yes," Holli stated simply. "It will not take us long." She said nothing further.
Ryson, however, felt the need to talk. He saw the vast emptiness of the desert before
them, and its far reaching desolation brought loneliness to his spirit.
"You know, when we get there, I'm not really going to know where to go." He offered
this as much as a warning as an attempt to open a conversation. "So far, I've been
traveling with a known objective. I mean, I knew how to get to the desert, but when I
reach it, I won't know much after that. I don't know how to find algors. I might be leading
us into nothing more than empty sand. Don't misunderstand, I'm not worrying about us
getting in any trouble out there. We can get food and water if we need it. It's just that we
may end up wandering around for weeks and I still might not find what we're looking
for."
Holli's eyes remained focused on unseen threats. Her reply was short and to the point.
"Trust your senses, delver. Mappel does and so do the forces that sent you to us."
Ryson grunted. It seemed every elf he met couldn't resist tying his meeting with Lief
to some act of fate. Couldn't they understand the curiosity of a delver and how it led to
his current predicament? It was the tremor which initiated his desire to renew
explorations. It was his brush with the walking dead which commenced his meeting with
Lief Woodson. Yet, every elf, from the spirit of Shayed to this elf guard, wished to act as
if Godson himself placed him within their midst. Could they not understand coincidence?
The delver could not refrain from discharging his annoyance with the suggestion.
"Here we go with that again. I keep trying to tell you all that I'm not here by any special
providence. I think you're all putting too much faith in something that may not even be a
factor."
"I only know what I am told and what I see," Holli replied simply.
"I just see a coincidence," Ryson insisted. "But no one else seems to agree." With a
shrug, he turned his attempt at conversation back to the subject of the Lacobian desert.
"Anyway, I'm just warning you that I really have no idea where to go when we reach the
sand. I remember everything that Mappel told me, but I don't think it will help me choose
one direction over another. I just want you to understand that."
"I understand that we are both on a mission. You will do what you must, and I will
guard you."
Holli did not let the conversation deter her from scanning the rocky terrain. Small rock
formations filled the area amid a barren landscape. Brown hills, basically appearing like
large, rounded boulders buried half underground, broke the level plane of the horizon to
the north and west. Any signs of Dark Spruce were far behind them. Cactus and
sagebrush presented the only break from the hard surroundings, and their own brown,
dry, harsh appearance accomplished little in offering any cheer.
Again, Ryson could not help but notice the ever watchfulness of the elf guard. "Did
you know that watching you do that can be very unnerving?" he asked. "You've been
looking around in every direction since we started. I have to admit you have me more
nervous than I think I've ever been. I keep thinking that something's going to jump out at
us. It was hard to deal with in the forest because we couldn't see very far. Now, that we're
out in the open, I've been able to deal with it a little better, but it still gets me uneasy
when you look behind us. What is it that you keep looking for?"
Holli spoke as if the answer should be obvious. "I watch for things which may or may
not be there. If I do not search, I will not be prepared."
"But shouldn't one look around here tell you that we're not being followed or that
nothing waits ahead of us in ambush."
Holli simply could not agree. "Things change from moment to moment. What I see
now may change within an instant. I will not know unless I check."
"So you never rest at this?"
"Not while on duty."
The delver considered the proposal. He understood the initial inspection, which fit
with his own delver instincts, but to keep examining the same thing, that sounded more
like tedium. It was a delver's desire to find something new, not to inspect for consistency.
He knew he would find it irksome to reexamine the same rock formations over and over
again just to remain alert. For him, for all delvers, there were other ways to sense change
or even danger. The sounds of loose rocks being disturbed ever so slightly, tracks off in
the distance, or the scent of an intruder; these warnings would gain a delver's attention,
but constant visual inspection seemed arduous at best.
"I imagine it would get pretty boring just looking around at the same stuff all the
time," he remarked. "There hasn't been much going on since we got out of the trees. I
don't know what you could be looking at, but we can see for a pretty good distance out
here. Not much is happening."
"That is exactly what a guard wants to see," Holli acknowledged.
Ryson raised an eyebrow as he considered the short statement. "I guess that's true. I
suppose if things kept changing you'd be pretty nervous. Let me ask you this, have you
ever been ambushed by anything?"
Holli answered without hesitation, though a note of displeasure drifted among her
words. "Not while at a post, and not on escort, but once on patrol."
"What does that mean exactly?" Ryson seized upon the response, hoping to coax
something new from the tight-lipped elf guard.
"A post is a fixed position. It is the easiest duty. A guard will take a position and
remain there for extended periods of time. Since we do not move, it is much easier for us
to spot an intruder. On patrol, we must move about a designated area. Since we are
moving, it makes it easier for an intruder to spot us first. That would give the intruder an
advantage. An escort is by far the most difficult. It covers a wide scope of the land. There
is usually no designated area, and there is little time for the guard to become acquainted
with the territory. It is what I do now."
"That's the most difficult?" Ryson wondered allowed, trying to compare the
differences in his mind.
"Absolutely. Consider what we now face. We travel in an ever-expanding path, we
have no idea what lies ahead. It is next to impossible to maintain continuous points of
reference. Our surroundings change with every step."
"I see. And you've never been ambushed while escorting?"
"No, it is what I excel at." Holli showed no sign of pride. She stated it as a simple fact.
Ryson hungered for more information about this elf. He wished to know what might
propel someone to remain ever so vigil. "Can you tell me what happened when you were
ambushed on patrol?"
Holli frowned. It was obviously a topic she did not like to remember, but again, she
did not hesitate in replying.
"It was early after my final training. I was patrolling the eastern edge of our camp. I
chose a path too high in the trees. I mistakenly believed it would give me the best vantage
point. It did not provide sufficient cover. I was spotted by a raiding party as I made my
rounds."
"What kind of raiding party?" Ryson asked with obvious curiosity.
"A group of elves from another camp."
"Really, other elves? You'll attack each other."
"Just a humans and delvers will," Holli responded, this time with a tone of
indignation. "Elves compete much the same way as other races. In harsh winters, there is
always a struggle for food."
"So that explains why you need guards. I was wondering about that. From what Lief
said, I gathered that the threats to the elves disappeared when the goblins and the other
dark creatures disappeared. I couldn't understand why the camp needed guards."
For the first time, Holli spoke with a passion as she quickly came to defense of her
accepted role. "There are many reasons for guards. We can warn of wild animals, secretly
turn away curious humans and delvers without them knowing we are even there, and also
fight off an angry tribe of dwarves out looking for trouble."
"You can turn away a delver?" Ryson responded with disbelief.
Holli answered as if reading from an elf guard's manual. "A delver will often follow
that which most calls to his curiosity. If a delver is moving toward an elfin camp, the
delver can be led away by creating diversions, or offering a mysterious sound or smell in
an opposite direction."
Ryson nodded. He could not argue the point but he did make a mental note. "I'll have
to remember that. Anyway, what happened with the raid?"
Holli's voice repossessed its heaviness. "Two of an opposing camp's party came from
below me using the thick branches as cover. I was lucky to escape their capture. I fled
back to the inner camp and warned of the raiders. It was my greatest failure."
"If you weren't captured, and you warned your camp, how can you consider that a
failure?"
"A guard’s responsibility is to find the raiders before they find you. I was located and
ambushed. I was forced from my position without discovering the party's size. It was not
what I was trained for."
"I see." Ryson saw the signs of discouragement on Holli's face. He felt the need to
console her. "But that sounds like a long time ago. You must have done much to make up
for that mistake."
"Perhaps."
Ryson did not allow the near defeated response to stand. "No, not perhaps. You must
have. I consider that a fact and let me tell you why. This is no small affair we're on now.
Mappel must trust you greatly. He knows what this is all about. Ever since I met you
elves, all I've heard is how things will never be the same and how crucial this whole
affair is. Do you think he would send just anybody in the desert with me? Besides that,
he's letting you carry that sword. You must know what kind of honor that is."
"It is indeed an honor, but also a great responsibility."
"Oh, I'm sure it is."
Ryson smiled as he noted the disappointment fading from his companion's expression.
He let silence overcome them, hoping the encouragement would drive any further
misgivings away from his escort. As they moved, now in quiet, he took an opportunity to
check things out for himself. Not only did he look off into the distance, he sniffed the air
and listened to the wind. He considered those things Mappel told him of the algors and
what he might sense in order to find them. Unfortunately, at this moment, he remained
unsure of where to travel when they reached the sand.
Thinking of the sand, it was at that moment that Ryson closely examined the ground.
Something troubled him. He watched as he stepped down into the mix of sand and rock.
He could not pinpoint his alarm, but he did not like how the ground reacted to his step.
He was about to say something to Holli, but suddenly, she dropped nearly out of sight.
The elf guard made no sound as her step took her through a camouflaged hole in the
ground. When her foot penetrated the veil of sand and rock, her momentum carried her
downward through a sizeable gap which measured two arm-lengths across. She showed
no sign of panic. She remained in control and used her forward momentum to propel
herself to the far side of the opening. Her right hand found solid ground, and she
managed to stop her fall. By that time, her entire body, up to her neck, remained
submerged under the surface of the ground. Only her head and her right arm remained
within the delver's sight.
Ryson leapt over the circular opening. He knelt in front of the elf and took hold of her
hand. He also reached into the opening and grabbed the back of her shoulder.
"Hold on, I'll pull you out."
As he began to lift her up, he heard a distinct clicking noise echo up through the hole.
The sound grew louder and quicker. The delver could not identify the noise, but he knew
whatever was causing it was moving towards them. He continued to pull Holli free, but
he leaned forward to look over her shoulder and into the hole. His eyes quickly
penetrated the darkness. He made out the trace outlines of a far reaching tunnel. It was
tubular in design, fairly tall and very wide.
His attention seized upon the source of the noise within this underground cavern. It
moved towards them through the shadows. It skittered through the tunnel in awkward
sideways movements, its many legs tapping over the sides and bottom of the tunnel. It
crawled vigorously, its intent clear.
As the creature closed upon Holli's vulnerable body, it bounded into the light that
cascaded through the opening. Ryson felt nothing but pure aversion to this thing. A
grotesque mix of spider and crab, grown to enormous proportions, it veered up with open
claws. Bone-hard pinchers the size of tree limbs and two eyes extending out of its face
brought similarities to the crab. The rest appeared like a giant spider with most of its
round body covered in thick black hair. Its six legs were jointed high in the middle, and
they propelled the creature directly towards Holli.
Ryson pulled with all his might. He tried to free Holli from the hole before the
creature could get any closer. She was halfway into the open air when the first claw
reached up and took her by the waist.
Again Holli made no sound. She attempted to twist free but could not break the grip.
She turned her head to look down at whatever held her. If it brought fear to her, she made
no sign of it. She quickly took her free left hand and brought it to her side. The other claw
grasped it just as quickly. She hovered halfway out of the hole but fully in the grip of this
monster.
Ryson continued to pull at her but the claws fought back. The delver held on with all
his strength even as Holli sunk further out of his sight. His grip around her right armed
tightened, and he dug his knees into the soft sand. He braced himself against the ground
swearing not to give up.
"Let go of my arm!" Holli commanded.
"What?!" Ryson exclaimed with ever-widening eyes.
"Let go of my arm!" she shouted forcefully.
The strength of her voice was so resolute, he almost obeyed without thinking. He did
not, however, release his hold.
"If I let go, it'll take you in!" he managed to blurt out as he continued to struggle
against the force which opposed him.
"Do it!" Her eyes blazed with such fury, her mouth formed a grimace out of pain and
anger. "Do it now!"
Ryson let go. He watched in absolute shock as Holli was completely sucked into the
hole. She was gone.
He knelt stunned for but a second. He darted his head back to the hole. They were not
directly below him as he hoped. The creature had backed away from the opening. It
would not allow its prey any chance of escape.
Ryson watched in horror as the two claws remained firmly attached to Holli's waist
and her left arm. It pulled her closer to its open mouth which included two large, white
fangs. Ryson was about to leap into the hole in hopes of saving the elf when Holli's quick
movements held him in place.
The elf, even while in the clutches of such a fiendish creature, found the strength to
use her right arm. Her hand flew to her waist in a blur. Her fingers gripped the hilt of the
powerful and magical sword which remained at her side. As the blade flashed out of its
sheath, it caught the drifting sunlight. The blade glowed like fire and it lit up the entire
tunnel for as far as Ryson could see.
The creature reacted violently to the blast of light, seemingly more out of fear than
pain. It did not drop Holli from its claws, but it pushed her further away from its face.
The two eyes of the monster recoiled. As they did, Holli brought the sword crashing
down between them. The light from the sword flashed with even greater brilliance. The
blade burned as if immersed in flames, and it split the creature nearly in two. The monster
collapsed to the ground with a crunch as dark liquid spilled from the huge gash.
Holli leapt clear and back towards the hole. She watched the dead creature for long
moments before checking her own wounds. Her waist and arms were cut, but all wounds
appeared merely superficial.
Ryson gracefully lowered himself into the tunnel beside the elf. He spoke with
obvious concern.
"Are you alright?"
"I'll live," the elf responded with obvious disgust.
"How's your waist?"
"Abrasions. Slightly bruised. They should be cleaned, but perhaps we should not
waste the water."
"Don't worry about the water. I can always get us more, even in the desert. Just take
care of yourself."
"I should be dead for such carelessness." Her voice was hollow, made even colder by
the echoes of the long reaching tunnel.
Ryson was taken aback by Holli's abruptness. Her response was more confusing than
the appearance of this mutated creature.
"What are you talking about?" he questioned.
"I'm talking about what happened here. I stepped right into a trap. You talk of how
Mappel trusts me. Now you see how I repay that trust."
"Hey, ease up. I barely noticed the hole and I'm a delver. I should have seen it long
before you fell in."
"I am an elf guard. I can not afford to make such mistakes." Her voice was cold and
bitter.
Ryson shook his head vehemently. "That's ridiculous."
"It is not ridiculous. What if you had fallen? If I had lost you to this thing, how could I
have explained it to my captain, to Mappel?"
Ryson could not accept the harsh self judgment. He pointed to the remains of the
creature with near ferocity. "Do you even know what that thing is?" he demanded. "I've
never seen anything like it. I doubt you have either."
"I do not know what it is," Holli answered with a near lifeless tone.
His pressing eyes bore down upon her. "Then how could you have been prepared for
it?"
"I must be prepared for everything," Holli responded quickly. "I was warned to watch
for the unknown, the unexpected. I did not fulfill my duty."
Ryson heaved a heavy breath. He was determined not to allow the elf to hold on to
such a perception. "What is your duty?"
Holli answered swiftly, and with more than a hint of self-disdain. "To protect you, to
see to the safe conclusion of your mission."
"Was I hurt?" The delver's simple question echoed through the tunnel.
Holli remained silent.
"Was I hurt?" he asked again. His expression demanded she speak the obvious answer.
"No," she allowed.
"Then you have not failed in your duty. You were told to watch for the unexpected.
That's a very vague instruction. You dealt with this monster better than I could have. And
neither of us got hurt. I can't ask for more than that."
For a moment, Holli appeared slightly relieved. Her sternness, however, returned
quickly. "Be that as it may, I can not allow such a thing to happen again. As you have
said before, yours is a mission of great importance. If we must face such unexpected
obstacles, then I must heighten my awareness."
She checked her ire long enough to apologize for what she felt was previously
inappropriate behavior. It was the duty of an elf guard to remain watchful over those they
escorted. They would give orders when safety was at risk, take command when danger
presented itself, but they were to always remain in control. They were also to give
continuous respect.
"By the way, forgive me for shouting orders at you, but I needed my right hand. I
could not free my left. I believed that the sword was my only hope."
Ryson waved aside the apology. He took no offense at the time, and none now. "I
would have yelled, too. As for the sword, it looks like you thought right." Ryson's gaze
locked upon the shimmering blade of the sword. Strangely, it did not hurt his eyes to stare
directly into the glowing metal that brought near daylight to this dark tunnel.
"That sword seems pretty special," he remarked with obvious interest. "It even gives
off its own light."
"It is not a source of light," Holli confessed, "it simply magnifies the light around it.
That is part of its enchantment. Do not underestimate that power. It can catch the faintest
gleam and offer enough light for travel into the darkest of caves. For example, it can
catch the light which flows through the hole in this tunnel from a great distance. We
could walk far and deep. We could turn corners and descend steep banks. We could reach
a length where are own eyes would sense no light at all. The sword, however, would still
capture the light which flows from that opening. It is only in an enclosed place where
light is completely blocked will the sword fail to offer illumination."
"I see." Ryson took a moment to glance down the long tunnel. The light from the
sword lit the passage way with greater depth than the brightest of lanterns. It allowed
Ryson to inspect the walls and to follow the path. The tunnel twisted and turned for a
great distance before the path curved out of sight. "I wonder how far this thing goes."
Holli showed no interest in the tunnel. "It is of no concern to us."
She stepped back to the opening and passed an expectant glance at the delver. She
obviously wished to exit the tunnel and continue with their original quest.
Ryson's curiosity would not be so easily contained. He meandered within the walls of
the tunnel, taking deep longing stares down the enclosed corridor. He offered his own
opinion. "I don't know about that. We don't know what that creature was. You said so
yourself. Maybe this tunnel holds the answer."
Holli's response was coldly logical. "The creature must be a result of the tainted magic
which now swells over the land. The sphere emits energies which can alter creatures in
unthinkable ways. It might have been nothing more than the egg of an ordinary spider
that somehow became mutated. It's a surprise we haven't come across something like this
sooner."
Ryson's growing desire to explore the tunnel exuded from him like smoke from a fire.
"But look at how long this tunnel goes. Who knows what we might find."
"And you wish to explore it?" Holli's expression was harsh.
"Of course. If the magic created this creature, it might have created something else."
She frowned dubiously. "Yes, something more terrible and more deadly. I do not see
the point in taking such a risk."
"We shouldn't just leave without inspecting at least a little further," Ryson requested.
"We may never have an opportunity like this again."
Holli stared sternly at the delver. "How will this help us in our quest to find the
algors?"
"I don't know. I don't know what may be down there. That's why I think it wouldn't
hurt to check it out."
"This will not help our cause," Holli spoke angrily.
Her tone finally caught Ryson's attention. He stood confused over her adamant stance.
"What's wrong?"
"You have been given a task," she replied forcefully. "That task was to find the algors,
or have you forgotten? We must find them and explain to them of what is happening.
According to Mappel, even according to you, there are important decisions to be made
involving the sphere. We have not the time to explore this irrelevant tunnel dug by some
monster. We must return to this objective."
"It won't take long just to have a look around," Ryson persisted.
"It will not help us." Her hardened stare did not ease. "I know what is causing this. It
is your natural instincts as a delver to explore that which is new to you. I must ask you to
contain these feelings until we have accomplished what we have set out to do. Now, I can
not find the algors on my own. That is your responsibility. But I also know that I can't
force you to do anything. I know enough about you that if you wanted to leave me behind
you could do so in an instant. I can't capture you or even keep up with you. I can only ask
you to remember your pledge to Mappel, and to Shayed. Remember your responsibilities
as I remember mine. We need to find the algors."
Ryson grimaced at acknowledging the truth. He knew his desire to explore the tunnel
failed to hold any true rewards other than satisfying his own curiosity. He cursed lightly
under his breath before accepting the only true course of action. He looked to Holli
requesting forgiveness with his eyes.
"Of course you're right. This kind of thing just happens to me sometimes. It's hard for
me keep my attention focused with so much going on. I hope you can understand."
"You do not have to explain further. Let us forget this matter and exit this tunnel. I
will need a moment to clean my wounds. Then, we will return to what we must do."


Ryson and Holli trekked without hesitation through the Lacobian desert. Holli,
accustomed to the thick brush of Dark Spruce Forest, cared little for the sand or the heat.
She would have welcomed the shady refuge of tall leafy trees, but only thin cacti
appeared along their travels. She longed for flowing streams or small quiet ponds, but the
desert offered only an empty ocean of sand. The sun poured down upon her and the hot
dry wind from the south bit at her skin. Her arms and legs were accustomed to climbing
and leaping, not struggling through these Lacobian dunes.
Holli ignored these pains. She concentrated upon the delver's back and upon the
surrounding land. As the sun and sand burned her eyes, she continued to scan the horizon
as well as the very ground they tread upon. As she watched the delver move so
effortlessly across this barren terrain, she remained always within arm’s reach, always
ready to defend him. She bit back any stray thought which begged her to give in to the
desert or to even request a moment's rest.
She called upon her training to keep her from tiring and to keep her moving forward in
these conditions so hostile to her race. Whenever she felt her strength diminish, she
placed her hand upon the hilt of the Sword of Decree. Its presence at her side reminded
her of the faith Mappel had placed in her. She affirmed to herself that she would not
delay the search for the algors. She would not slow the delver or force him to rest when
he did not need it. She would continue far after all her strength evaporated into the dry
desert heat if need be. Her own will and determination would carry her to the end of this
quest.
So true was Holli's spirit, that Ryson did not even recognize her struggle. He stopped
only when absolutely necessary. When he did, their pauses were brief. He also began to
use the desert more and more to his advantage. He declared they would save all of their
supplies and use only that which he could take from the land. He used his knife to coax
liquids from hidden roots and from the innards of the surrounding cacti. After short
breaks to complete such tasks, they were again on their way.
As Ryson moved through the desert, he opened his senses. He fought from focusing
upon one item. Instead, he exposed his senses to everything around him. His mind turned
back to the advice of Mappel.
Mappel had tried to explain how the algors lived based on his knowledge of elflore.
They did not live in small camps like the elves, in towns like the humans, or in
underground cities like the dwarves. They lived together, yet apart. Thousands upon
thousands lived within the desert and considered themselves part of the greater
community, but that community spread itself thinly over the vast desert. They dug dens in
high sand dunes, they made homes in hollow cacti, they even found shelter in caves
among the desert cliffs. They preferred a life equally split between solitude and group
activity. As quickly as they would wander off into desolation, they would return to find
kinship with other members of their community.
While each held a sense of strong loyalty to another, they fashioned their lifestyles
upon individualism. It was a difficult prospect for outsiders to accept, for the algors
appeared born with a natural sense of conformity; their desire to shed this inherent
attribute led them to near split personalities.
As for their other habits, Mappel had described the algors as using every element of
the desert to their advantage. They would feed from a cactus at the top of the stalk so as
not to harm the roots or trunk. They would mold the very sand around them to construct
dunes that would protect them from the sun and the hot dry winds. It was these things
which Ryson focused upon as he traveled through the desert.
The delver constantly surveyed the land looking for such signs. He examined every
cactus hoping to find claw marks indicating a recent climb to the top. He watched the
breeze break across the desert trying to see signs of an unnatural barrier. He also lifted his
nose to the air hoping to catch a unique scent which might indicate the presence of a
creature he had never before met. He listened to the wind. Perhaps he would hear the
slight vibration of a distant call. He held himself out for anything, anything at all. He
would grasp upon the slightest clue to lead them.
For the moment, he found nothing. He followed only his instincts. He trotted forward
making turns based on nothing more than a whim. His direction held no true logic; he
simply plodded forward like a hungry beggar looking for a morsel of bread in a land
devoid of food. Yet, he held to the belief that at any minute he would hone in upon the
smell, the sound, or the sight of something that would lead him to his ultimate
destination.
The day trudged on. The wind quickened and the sun baked the sand as it began to
sink from its position directly overhead. If night would bring them cooler times, they
would pay for it first with the billowing heat of the latter half of day.
Still, they moved forward blindly, aimlessly across the wasteland. Even the scorpions
and desert birds took refuge from the baking sun. The two appeared alone, searching for
something they could not identify. Only their footsteps in the sand and on rock
accompanied them now, and these trailed off behind them far out of sight, like a long
wandering tail. It reminded Holli of the loneliness of their journey each time she turned to
check their flanks.
When the elf did turn, she could not avoid the scope of their travel. Nothing in the
distance behind them offered any sense of security. Any trace of the forest had long since
vanished. The desolation of what surrounded them was overpowering. Hopelessness,
loneliness, desperation; these were the emotions which attacked her mind. She spit these
crushing thoughts from her like a bad aftertaste. There were more important things for
her to focus on now.
As the sun lowered, the heat became thicker, stronger. It pressed upon her like some
unseen hand trying to force her to her knees. Maintaining the pace the delver set became
more and more difficult. Purely and simply, the elf was asking her body to maintain a
cross country run through the desert. While her physical condition allowed for great
stress, there remained limits. She was now exceeding those limits, and she faced yet one
more battle to fight, the struggle of mind over body. She would have to convince her own
tiring, aching muscles that they could indeed continue.
It became a personal war with the desert itself. She turned the wasteland into a
powerful foe that mocked her. As she continued to scan the horizon, she looked over the
dunes with growing animosity. The sand, the sun, and the wind were now all enemies that
wished to stop her. It was up to her own perseverance to win this battle, and she remained
determined against any failing. She began to care almost singularly about this one point.
The desert would not defeat her.
Ryson did not face the same difficulties. His body apparently adapted to all
environments. Like the chameleon, his very body chemistry altered to match his
surroundings. The heat barely affected him. Running across this empty land offered no
true challenge to his skills. The true challenge rested in the search itself, in finding the
algors, a search he continued without frustration. Even as he moved without true
direction, he maintained a vigorously determined outlook upon his intentions. The day
was passing without a single hint of the mythical algors, yet he remained open-minded to
their existence. More, he now accepted their existence as fact. The question to him was
no longer if they were actually in the desert. It was more if he could find them. With such
a challenge, his delver blood flowed true, and he began to move with methodical
precision.
More and more, he pulled the spyscope from the pouch at his belt. He scanned far
across the desert, inspecting the terrain with more and more concentration. Perhaps, it
was the purifying power of the desert which began to clear his mind of his own
unconscious barriers, the long travel over rock and sand with a dry wind cleansing him of
self-doubts. It brought an edge to his senses and brought out the most receptive instincts
inherent to a purebred delver. He began to sense things about the desert that he did not
even notice when their journey began. Each time he brought the scope to an eye, he
nodded in approval. He even began to smile with great satisfaction.
As this behavior increased, Holli wondered if the desert was taking the mind of the
delver. She knew of how such conditions could drive anyone to madness. She worried if
the madness now controlled her companion. She finally decided to break her silence even
if it meant momentarily delaying their search.
"Delver," she called to him over his shoulder. "Are you alright?"
Ryson twirled about with great energy. He smiled happily. "I'm fine, Holli." He said
nothing more. He watched her expectantly, obviously hoping she would continue to
question him.
"What is it?" Her tone indicated she was tired and expected an immediate explanation.
"They are here," he said plainly, but with an even bigger smile.
"You are sure?" The elf took her attention from the delver. Her body became tense and
ready. Her hand fell to the hilt of the sword as she scanned all directions. The wear of the
desert upon her body almost completely disappeared as she considered facing possible
danger.
"You can't see them," Ryson offered. "I haven't seen them yet, but they have been
here. I'm on to them now. Actually, it's not so much as following a single algor. It's more
of finding signs of many of them. They do congregate, but they spread themselves thin
just the same. There are so many different and opposing signs to look for. It's possible
we've passed right by many of them for a long time. I didn't know what to look for when
we started, but I do now. I see how they've forced changes on the desert that the wind
couldn't have made. I see how they've made markings which appear totally natural, but
offer landmarks for their own kind. Even now we're closing in upon an area which is well
traveled by many of them. There's no question about it. They exist, and they're here."
Holli spoke with relief, as if believing the long journey was finally coming to an end,
her own personal victory over the desert assured. "I take your word for it. What do we do
now?"
"We find them." His smile did not vanish. It remained on his face as he pointed to a
ridge of a sandstone mountain off to the west. "That is where we have to go."


It was with great hope that Mappel and Lief had undertaken their journey to Connel.
After Ryson Acumen and his escort departed for the Lacobian desert, Mappel had
advised the rest of his camp of the situation they all faced. The discussion lasted much of
that night. The following morning, he sent messengers to the dwarf city of Dunop with
strict instructions. With all preparations complete, the elder elf and Lief had set out for
Connel.
Even at his age, Mappel navigated the Dark Spruce Forest with casual ease. In but half
a day they drew near the limits of Pinesway. Upon entering the town, they covered their
ears with forester's caps. Their clothes were not that much different from their human
counterparts. Only the hats and cloaks worn on such a beautiful day might have raised an
eyebrow, but their arrival within the town's center caused not the slightest stir.
They themselves felt more uncomfortable than the humans that passed them in the
streets. Walking among the townspeople, across paved roads, and past tall buildings; this
was both a new and unnerving experience. Their ears were concealed, but their selfconsciousness could not be as easily tamed. More than once, they gaped at the crowds
gathered at a street market or at the lavish decorations of the surrounding architecture.
Viewing the humans from a distance could simply not prepare them for the experience of
walking among them. The two elves felt as if they had slipped through space and time
and into a new dimension.
Both Mappel and Lief forced this unease away as they realized that interaction with
the humans was now inevitable. Without wasting much time, they secured faster
transportation to Connel. Upon rented horses, paid for with gold dust obtained through
trade from the dwarves, they reached their destination easily within the same day.
It pained Mappel to pass beyond the lands which led to Connel. Farmland had
replaced wide areas where Dark Spruce was once in full command with its many trees.
He wondered how many of them fell to the woodsman's axe to clear such long stretches
of land. A few trees remained as markers for farmers and travelers; lonely sentinels;
reminders of what once was.
Lief pointed out the outline of buildings in the distance as they approached Connel,
which in truth was now more of a city. Activity bustled as they closed upon the growing
collection of structures on the horizon. It re-energized Mappel to see the stone wall still
intact, but the sprawling size of Connel, which now actually spilled over sections of the
wall, did little to ease his anxieties.
Much had changed since the time of legends, since Shayed stood with the humans,
algors, dwarves and elves. This human town was filled with dwellings, shops, and inns;
few of which honored the past, thus it was easy to spot their ultimate destination,
Matthew's Church of Godson.
Upon entering the church, they had announced themselves as messengers of Ryson
Acumen with important news. They were apparently not the first for other members of
the church paid little attention to their arrival. They were quickly escorted to Reader
Matthew's quarters in the back of the church.
Matthew met with the two alone. It was clear he awaited news from the delver
eagerly.
Mappel spoke calmly and succinctly as Lief remained silent but vigilant at his elder's
side. The elder elf did not at the outset reveal his identity or his true purpose. He recited
the findings of Ryson Acumen as if giving a report. He waited to judge the reader's
reaction to the emergence of the sphere before announcing the true purpose of his visit.
Reader Matthew took the report with obvious agitation, but he showed no sign of true
disbelief. He made no scoffing remarks, nor did he fail to accept the enormity of such
news. He only demonstrated great concern. He was troubled and worried and the report
left him weary.
It was then that both Mappel and Lief removed their hats and truly detailed the
happenings that caused their very arrival upon his doorstep. Their pointed ears became
unmistakable exclamations to a tale which was even now unfolding, a tale which was not
foretold and where the conclusion was far from certain.
Lief remained watchful and alert, but obviously uneasy at being confined within the
stone walls of the church as well as the bricked walls of this smaller room. He moved
about at small intervals to check each corner as if concerned with every shadow. After
each pass, he returned to Mappel's side, and stood quietly.
The elder elf rested his weight against his long wooden staff. The long travel tired him
only slightly. He showed less signs of agitation with being confined within the small
room than his counterpart. Other than taking a moment to feel the heavy bricks of the
wall and the oak panels which formed the door frame upon entering, Mappel stood with
his attention focused squarely upon the reader.
As he continued to speak, he coughed momentarily, an expulsion of road dust. He
accepted a cup of wine produced from a cabinet behind the reader's desk. He sipped it
gently and allowed the weight of the goblet to rest against the side of his staff.
With their identities revealed, Mappel included every detail from Lief's early warning
to his return with the delver. In his explanations, Mappel spoke of Ryson Acumen with
high regard. He reported the appearance of the spirit of Shayed and of her message to
Lief and Ryson. He told the reader of Ryson's wishes to explain all the events which had
unfolded.
It was thus that the reader now faced the unveiled truth behind the earthquake which
unsettled him so many days ago.
"I do not doubt your word, Mappel; it is just that you must understand none of us were
prepared for this." Reader Matthew tried to explain his position as his own thoughts lay
scrambled. "Please do not mistake my words. It is not that I don't believe in what you say,
or even in your very existence. It's part of my faith to believe in what many call the
legends, which includes elves. I've believed all along that elves exist. I know that the
sphere was buried long ago, and the captured magic with it. That is all part of the Book of
Godson. That is the foundation of my religion. I accept it. But your presence here, at this
time, does come as yet another surprise, and surprises are something I am not used to."
The reader paused to regroup his thoughts. It was his great desire to make his position
very clear to the elder elf. "It's not that I thought the separation of elves and humans
would continue forever. That's not true at all. I believe it's inevitable that the land will
someday revert back to the time of legends, when humans would again have to accept the
existence of the other races. In truth, that has been prophesied for us, and until now I have
learned to trust, even depend, on these prophesies. It is part of our faith, but the return of
the magic was not foretold. Nothing of our prophesies spoke of the sphere returning as a
threat. To be sure, there is always the shadow of great powers and forces beyond our
recognition, playing a role in our future. I always assumed, however, that those forces
would be beyond our reach. Never have I read or heard of the sphere freeing itself from
Sanctum. It is this lone fact that causes me great concern and, yes, even great doubts."
"Do not apologize for such concerns," Mappel replied, showing a deep understanding
and appreciation for the reader's plight. "I find no insult in your words or your actions. In
fact, I share them. Our own elflore also leaves us without guidance during this trying
time. It seems the prophets have left us to our own designs in this matter."
"Your people were also not prepared for this event?" The reader did not know whether
to feel relief or greater despair at this possibility. It was a comfort to see he was not alone,
but he wondered if this revelation truly held anything to be thankful for.
"No," Mappel replied firmly, yet sadly. "The elves have had their share of prophets.
Elflore is as much a guide for the future as it is a map of the past, but we enter this day
without the grace of their foresight."
Reader Matthew bent his head with a grunt of frustration. He eyed the aged, clothbound cover of the Book of Godson which always remained upon his simple desk. His
hand brushed over the top of the worn cover, seemingly reaching for comfort and
wisdom. He found little. "I wish I could be of more help to you. Less than a season ago, I
would have believed this church and its followers were prepared for everything, that we
were blessed with knowledge of all things to come. How naive. To think, we were so full
of pride, even scorn for nonbelievers. We secretly laughed at their ignorance. Now, I find
we face true danger without any such blessing. I wonder who is laughing now."
Matthew chuckled sarcastically at himself. His eyes revealed the pain he felt in his
soul. He looked to the two elves that watched him with obvious interest. He felt no
embarrassment at his own remarks. He repeated his heartfelt apology. "I am sorry I could
not have been more help to you."
Mappel smiled and exuded a warmth which indicated a personal understanding to
Matthew's plight. "Again, I will tell you not to apologize. I comprehend your
dissatisfaction, greater than you might realize. You and I are looked upon as spiritual
leaders. There are great expectations of us, yet we are not prophets and we are not gods.
We are both limited by the failings which are inherent of all our people. We must,
however, look beyond that now. From what I have learned, we face a great struggle. We
must set aside our shortcomings, rise above them. The truth be told, I am very grateful to
have found you. You have been more open-minded to our cause then I might have hoped.
Certainly, you are more willing to listen to us than any other member of this town, and
we do need the help of the humans. We need the help of all the races. The fact that I was
directed to you, the reader in this church, I take that as a sign of hope. I also find strength
in the fact that Connel finds itself at the center of our struggle. The simple arrival of a
purebred delver in our forest has brought us back to the ancient wall that allowed the
races to survive so long ago. It is this hope I now carry."
"Speaking of Ryson, where is the good delver now?" Matthew asked with a raised
eyebrow.
"Ryson Acumen walks the Lacobian desert in search of the algors. As I have said, we
need the help of all the races."
Upon what the reader had already seen and heard, the prospect of dealing with algors
seemed as ordinary as dealing with the merchant across the street. He thought more of the
sphere, the return of the magic, and the danger they all faced.
"Will the algors assist in this matter?" the reader wondered aloud.
"I can only hope they will," Mappel responded with simple confidence. "I believe in
such. According to elflore, I imagine they would find such a cause most interesting. They
might remain skeptical of our reasons, but certainly no more dubious than the dwarves."
"The true problem will be finding them," Lief noted.
"I would not be too concerned of that," the reader came quickly to the defense of the
delver. "Ryson Acumen is full-bred delver. I don't know how long it will take, but I know
the power of these people. If it is there to be found, Ryson will find it."
Lief cleared his throat. "I meant no disrespect to Ryson Acumen. His assistance has
already proven to be priceless. It is just that the algor has not been seen by elf nor dwarf
since the entombing of the sphere. I can't help but wonder if they even still exist. The
desert, after all is a harsh place."
"Harsh to an elf, but not to an algor," Mappel reminded his escort. "The algors still
exist. The reunion of all the races is spoken of in elflore. There is no mention of the loss
of a single race."
Matthew took a moment to reflect upon Mappel's reasoning. Something within those
words sparked an idea, a hope of his own. He leapt upon it, grasped it with obvious
enthusiasm. "Is it possible ..., I can't believe I haven't thought of that. If it's true, it could
mean that it was foretold. A connection, but maybe out of place. Sequences are
important, but not always. It's possible."
Mappel watched the reader carefully. He wished for an explanation. "You feel you
have discovered something?"
The elf's voice startled Matthew, brought a realization he was jabbering as he
attempted to organize his thoughts. He brought his hand away from his face to turn a
questioning glance to Mappel. "I don't know. Let me ask you this first. Your elflore, does
it explain the reunion of the races? I mean, you just said that elflore refers to a reunion.
Does it explain how that is to be accomplished?"
"No, it does not. It simply states that the age of separation shall end. It does not
explain how."
"That's what brings a question to my mind," Matthew presented. "I've spent all this
time going over the prophesies to find something to connect to this event and I've missed
the most obvious. You state that elflore speaks of a reunion. I have already indicated that
the prophesies within the Book of Godson refer to a time when the other races would
return to make their presence known. Don't you think that the return of the sphere may be
the very cause of this prophesy? We have been worried because this most significant
event has not been forecasted by our prophets. Maybe it has, just not as clearly as we
would have liked." The statement faded off as more of a question of hope held out to the
elder elf, and Matthew waited for a response.
Mappel glided his hand along his staff. This skin on his forehead crinkled into long
deep lines as he considered the thought. "Interesting. Foretold, but not foretold. It is
strange that neither prophesies mention how the separation is to end."
Matthew's eyes lit up with a spark of increasing hope. "But it was specified in both
that the races would be united. From what you have told me so far, such a reunion is now
necessary. In a way, this event has been foretold to us."
Mappel's assurance came more grudgingly. He could not simply accept such a loose
connection. "Who is to say? That interpretation may very well be correct. 
The reemergence of the sphere does indeed force us into such a situation. But can we infer so
much? While I do not wish to dampen your hopes, I must point out other significant
factors. It does not explain as to why we were not warned of the sphere. It is clear to me
that such an event is of major importance. I merely need to point to the reappearance of
Shayed. We now face a battle where all life hangs in the balance. We must enter
Sanctum. Such an undertaking is without question the most significant action that any
people might employ during this time. There is more here than the simple re-unification
of the races. In its own way, Sanctum has been a landmark to the era created when the
magic was removed from the land. Destroying the sphere will mean more than the reunification of the races. 
It signifies the very end of an accepted way of life. I can not
believe that such an event could have been overlooked by our prophets, or yours."
At first the reader appeared to wish to debate the matter. He shook his head ever so
slightly as Mappel spoke. He did not, however, blurt out a response upon Mappel's
conclusion. He rose from his chair behind his desk and began to pace the room with his
hands behind his back. The heels of his shoes clicked hollowly against the stone floor
until they hit the mat which covered the center. The soft woolen floor covering silenced
his steps until he reached the far end of the room. Crossing beyond the border of the mat
and on to the stone, again his shoes snapped out a light crack.
"I must agree," Matthew finally answered with a defeated groan. "The return of the
magic is mind boggling in its scope. Much smaller events have been prophesied and
interpreted for us. It is mystifying as to why this event was not foretold." He turned and
faced the elder elf. "Forgive me if I appeared reluctant to accept your words at first. It's
just that I had hoped for a moment that I might still rely upon the prophecies in this
matter. I so want to believe that the plan of Godson as told to us will unfold without
intervention. I wish to remain as faithful to this as possible, but I cannot overlook the
obvious. The sphere appears beyond that plan."
"Your reactions are not foreign to me. I expect I am doing much of the same," Mappel
admitted. "I keep reaffirming that there are other powers at work here, coming to our aid.
I have made such a claim when Lief came upon Ryson Acumen and again when I found
you here in Connel. It lessens my own concerns to hope that we are not left alone to face
such a dreadful task, but I must face the cold facts. Elflore is lacking in guidance. We
face this matter with but our own wisdom. Perhaps it is but a test to prove whether we are
worthy for what might come in the future. Perhaps the same is true for your people as
well. If you are to see the plan of Godson unfold, then you must deal with this particular
danger with your own spirit and power."
Lief Woodson began to speak, but his voice cracked. He cleared his throat quickly.
His expression made it clear he felt uncomfortable speaking of such weighty matters. It
was not his place. Yet, he could not resist speaking of his moment in the presence of
Shayed. "I claim no vast knowledge of elflore or of Godson. I know only of what I have
seen these past days. As I have told Mappel, the great Shayed spoke of the threat we face.
She also spoke of the prophets. The power of the sphere seems beyond them. I don't
believe you will find the matter addressed in either the book of Godson or elflore.
According to her, what we face now, we face on our own. If any of us wish to save the
land, we must destroy the sphere by our own doing."
Mappel placed a hand on Lief's shoulder. "My good elf. You speak with passion, but
we must always hope that we are not alone. I agree that we will do what we must do, but
we must never forget our beliefs, our hopes, our faith. I will not dispute what Shayed has
spoken to you, but what of the powers that sent her back to us? Yes, she said the sphere
resists the foreshadowing of the prophets, but it has not resisted the greater powers which
I believe exist in this land. Say what you will, but I believe we will not be alone when we
enter Sanctum."
Silence filled the chamber. Lief shifted his gaze uncomfortably to the floor. He stood
motionless.
The reader felt reassured by Mappel's words. He might not have found the script in the
book of Godson to ease his insecurities, but the presence and the words of the elder elf
brought his own faith welling up within him. He honestly believed that with such faith,
even conquering Sanctum was not beyond his reach.
"Speaking of entering Sanctum," the reader questioned with renewed vigor, "have you
any plan for this undertaking? Obviously it must be done, that is why you are here. You
have made it clear that the spirit of Shayed requests that the sphere be destroyed. You
yourself say that the magic still contains the taint of poison for the elves and that it will
soon affect us all. If you plan to destroy the sphere, which seems apparent, you will face
many obstacles. First, you must enter Sanctum. Our own book of Godson speaks of
Sanctum and the five tiers. The tiers were constructed to prevent exactly what you hope
to accomplish."
Mappel returned his empty wine goblet to the desk of the reader. He grasped his staff
with greater resilience as he professed his intentions. "At the moment, I have no intricate
plan, no detailed design for what we face. I simply look to the ultimate objective. The
first order of business is to realign the races, make everyone understand what we face. It
is thus I have sent messengers to the dwarves and algors. With my apologies, I admit that
I have requested that the representatives meet here, in this very church. I know I should
have consulted you, but time has become a factor. From Ryson Acumen's testimony, I
believed you would be the most helpful to our cause. With members of each race in
attendance, I will explain everything I know. I will hope that each race will understand
the dire consequences. I will pray that the secrets of Sanctum are revealed so that together
we can devise a scheme to overcome these obstacles.
"However, I am not so blind that I don't foresee great difficulties. The mistrust
between all the races has had centuries to grow and fester. The dwarves themselves will
be reserved against revealing their own secrets of Sanctum. It may well be that each race
will refuse to unlock the secret of their tier. In such a case, I will be faced with dark
prospects, but they will not stop me. I have no choice. The sphere must be destroyed. All
elves will eventually see that one pure fact. Every camp, even enemies, will join to fulfill
the request of Shayed. I will send an army of elves to their deaths if need be and send
another army after that. Our people will die anyway, an attack on Sanctum will at least
give us a chance.
"I will make demands of all the races, as well. I will request that the dwarves push
themselves beyond the point of exhaustion to tear Sanctum apart stone by stone if that is
the only way to get to its heart. I will demand the industry and the great multitudes of the
humans be used to accomplish our task. I will send delver after delver into Sanctum to
scout the dangers until I can find no more. Whether any race agrees to help is beyond my
power, but it will not stop me from making each demand.
"I realize that many lives will be lost if this is how we must enter the mountain and
this will be my plan of last resort. First, I will attempt to break the mistrust between the
races. I hope that I will convince each to reveal the secrets of the tiers before any die
needlessly within Sanctum. If we all reveal our secrets, we may yet determine a way to
move unimpeded to the sphere."
Matthew's hope faded ever so slightly. He sat back down in his wooden chair behind
his desk. He considered Mappel's words and again his hand found the cover of the book
before him. He peered down upon the collection of words which represented his faith. A
sorrowful expression shadowed his face. "That is a mighty request. I will be honest with
you. Even if I knew the secrets of Sanctum, I don't know if I would simply give them to
you now."
The reader reflected upon his own answer before continuing. "Call it a lack of trust if
you will, and in all honesty it does shame me, but I just don't know if I could reveal such
a secret. Oh, I understand the need for trust at this time. I clearly see that if we must
destroy the sphere, such information is vital. But would I have the right to simply divulge
such information on such short notice, with such little information? Here in the face of all
of this, I don't know if I could simply reveal a secret of such magnitude without greater
assurances. I imagine having knowledge of Sanctum carries with it great responsibility.
Were it my responsibility, I might remain honor bound to maintain secrecy until I was
absolutely certain there was no other choice."
Mappel shifted his weight as he changed the angle in which he held his staff. "I
understand all too well what you speak of, for I have that responsibility. I can only tell
you that I would be willing to reveal what I know to increase our chances of success."
"But will others be so willing?" Matthew persisted voicing his doubts. "The five tiers
were constructed so that no one might enter to regain the power of the sphere. What you
will ask of all the races is in direct opposition of this." Matthew looked up at the elder elf
and began to speak quickly. "Please understand, although I know I'm not explaining
myself well. It's just that you present more than a request. The tiers represent a sense of
safety for all the races that understand the legends. It is so that no power might use the
sphere. I realize the sphere now becomes a danger and the tiers are now an obstacle in
ending that danger. It is difficult, though, to simply free myself of the covenant of the
tiers. If such skepticism rests within me, how will you convince all the races?"
Mappel addressed the question with understanding, but with no less resolve. "I am
already aware of such difficulties, but there is no other way. It will be my task to make all
understand that there is no other choice."
Matthew exhaled deeply. He crossed his hands atop his desk over his book. "I am glad
I won't have to make that decision. In all honesty, I do not know what the humans placed
in their tier, but I know who might.”
At this, Mappel’s eyes widened with interest as well as hope. “There is a human in
your church that might have this information.”
“He’s not a simple member of just this church. He is a blessing to all of those that
follow the word of Godson. I will do my best to get word to him. Until then, I can only
suggest we focus upon other problems."
Lief found it refreshing to face something other than the sphere, elflore and the book
of Godson. He gladly seized upon the opportunity to deal with other matters. "What
problems may that be?"
Matthew spoke with a heaviness that revealed a deeper shame, a shame of how his
own kind might react to the sudden presence of such beings as elves, dwarves, and algors.
"If you plan to bring representatives of other races to Connel, you will have to give
previous warning to the residents of this town. We may be able to hide their presence for
a while, but as more come, it will be difficult to keep such a thing a secret. Such a thing
might cause a panic. If we do not address this now, we might face a greater problem
when we need it least."
"What is it you recommend?" Mappel questioned, regarding such matters with serious
conviction.
"I am not good at this, dealing with such problems." Matthew conceded. "The
followers of this church are viewed as outsiders. I doubt our warnings would be taken
with any regard. I would suggest we meet with the town council. But it is late and the sun
is almost down. It's going to be hard enough to see the council as it is. It would be near
impossible to see them this very evening. It would be better for us to make the attempt
tomorrow morning. I suggest we break for a meal. Then, perhaps we can talk further. I
know I have a lot of questions for you. I suppose you have the same for me. I would hope
that you would stay here tonight and we can discuss all of these things, then we can see
the council at daybreak."
Mappel nodded in agreement. "We are honored to stay within a Church of Godson. I
must admit it will be strange for us to sleep within the confines of any building, but I
would also admit that if I had to choose such a place, it would be here. There is much to
discuss, and even more to plan. As events unfold, it becomes more and more evident to
me that the barriers between humans and elves must fade. We have a long road to travel.
It is best we travel it together."


The fog drew close upon Matthew as he guided the two elves through the streets of
Connel. The previous evening was a cool one, allowing for warm fires within hearths as
well as vast quantities of dew, even in the dusty streets. As the sun broke the eastern
horizon, the warm rays excited the layers of moisture into a jubilant mist.
Such was not uncommon for the growing season. It would take the passing of many
more days before the ground absorbed enough heat to refuse the wetness of night, before
the onset of the dry season when long hot days began at first light.
Matthew silently thanked Godson for the fog, a blanket of security and secrecy from
prying eyes. If he had to walk the streets with strangers, far stranger than any might
believe if they could see the ears which were hidden behind the forester caps, it was best
to do it behind a veil of mist. It would not take long for the rising sun to burn off the last
remnants of the fog, but it lasted long enough to see the two cloaked figures follow
Matthew through the doors of the town hall.
Surprisingly, they were guided directly into the mayor's office within moments of
their arrival. Matthew did little more than announce their presence and an urgency to
speak with the town council. The receptionist greeted the request with unfettered
nervousness, rather than the cold dismissal Matthew expected. As the two elves and the
reader were left with the mayor, the door thumped shut with the heaviness of a vault.
Matthew, Mappel, and Lief found themselves in a dimly lit office with the blinds shut.
The cobblestone fireplace remained cold and dark. The growing warmth of this morning
required no fire, but the sterile cold and dimness of this office begged for the bright
flames.
Mappel pulled his cloak tighter around his shoulders to shield him from the strange
chill. He allowed himself a moment to inspect his surroundings. The room was much
bigger than Matthew's chamber at the church and included many more lavish decorations,
but Mappel found this room uninviting. As he turned his head about, he noted the dark
paneled walls that appeared newly cleaned. The thick rug also appeared fresh, and clear
of dirt. The air smelled of disinfectant, and the windows remained closed. The office was
almost completely devoid of life and nature. It certainly held no inviting hand to an elf,
and for perhaps the first time in his life, Mappel felt his age.
Lief also found no comfort within these walls. The large volumes of books upon the
shelves did not impress him. Neither did the paintings hanging upon the walls. Again, he
felt trapped and contained, but even more so with so many distractions placed around the
room. He longed for the green of the forest which was notably absent in this seemingly
lifeless environment.
Matthew stepped forward ahead of the elves. He faced the large mahogany desk which
stood majestically in front of them. The desk top, outlined with gold edging, contained
piles of miscellaneous papers. It also contained the name plate of the current mayor,
Edward Consprite.
Consprite sat in a full thick leather chair, behind his desk. The chair was turned to face
the back wall and the three guests could only see the top of his balding head barely
peeking over the hilt of the chair.
Matthew went to clear his throat to gain the mayor's attention.
Before he could make a sound, Consprite swerved his chair about and faced his
visitors for the first time. His expression revealed his total lack of joy for their presence.
His eyebrows raged downward in the middle, creating a crease just above the bridge of
his nose which rose upward to his forehead. His jaw remained tight as he placed his
hands down flat upon the desk top. He examined his visitors with notable disdain.
After his eyes whisked quickly over the two cloaked companions, Consprite's stare
fixed coldly upon Reader Matthew. He frowned, almost angrily. His teeth barely broke
their clench when he finally spoke.
"Why are you here?" he asked bluntly and coldly.
Matthew was taken aback by the surly approach. Members of his church were used to
poor attitudes of other townspeople, but never such outward hostility. They were
normally laughed or scoffed at, usually ignored, but hardly ever challenged with great
antagonism.
The reader gathered himself and tried to ease into a conversation. "Thank you for
seeing us. I have to admit I was surprised you would see us so quickly. Usually the
council is rather reluctant to meet with members of my church."
The mayor would not let him continue. He spoke with demanding impatience as well
as anger. "What do you want?" It was much more of an order than a politely, or even
tactfully placed question.
Consprite's anger again caught Matthew off guard. He stood silenced for long
moments. Lief and Mappel remained behind him, their gazes shifting back and forth from
the mayor to the reader.
Matthew finally contained his surprise and stiffened himself with new resolve. His
thoughts garnered an image of Godson. With a new focus, he met the mayor's angry glare
with simple inner strength.
"I wish to speak to the council on matters of great importance." His voice reflected
little defiance and no arrogance. "Do not misjudge my intentions. I am not here simply on
behalf of my church. I am not going to make any demands of funds. I am here to inform
you. What I will tell you, you will need to know. If you do not hear me out you will not
be happy with what you might face in the future."
The mayor's eyes remained fixed upon the reader. His expression changed ever so
slightly. It continued to contain outward hostility, but even Matthew sensed a note of
concern behind Consprite's flashing eyes.
"What is it you have to say?"
"I would rather speak to the entire council. This is a matter which will affect everyone
in this town, everyone in the land."
Consprite appeared quite unfazed by this remark. He made no scoffing gesture and
spoke not a single word of rebuttal. If anything, the hint of concern grew ever so slightly.
This reaction wasn't lost upon the reader. He expected to face more than doubt from
the council; he expected to face downright disbelief and ridicule. After all, he was merely
the reader for the Church of Godson, an unenviable position in a place filled with
nonbelievers. Surely, he would have great difficulty in convincing the council of any of
his story. This was why he brought the elves with him. Without them, he honestly
believed his tale would not gain a single shred of respect from the council, especially
from the mayor. He could only hope that the presence of the elves might sway them into
accepting at least a portion of his story.
Now, however, he looked into a face that showed a great sign of concern; not at all
what he had expected. The mayor was absorbed with some great anxiety, and Matthew's
appearance in his office did little to ease his tensions.
"The council can not convene today," Consprite again spoke bluntly. "You will have
to speak to me and me alone."
Matthew did not let a second wave of surprise break him from his intentions. He
wavered only for a moment, searching for the right words to convey the true importance
of what he had to say, and then offered his own response. "I do not think that is a wise
idea. I can only say that my message is of great importance. It would be better if the
council heard it together."
The mayor slapped his hands angrily against the top of the desk. His palms hit with
such force that papers lifted up in the air before wafting back down slowly to their
previous, albeit more confused, positions. All three visitors jumped slightly at the violent
sound which cracked through the room. Consprite gave them little regard as he clenched
his open hands into fists. He then brought them to his sides as he folded his arms across
his chest.
"Look reader," Consprite spoke with a low snarl, a growl like a trapped, frustrated
badger. "I don't think you understand! I said the council can not convene today. Now you
will give me your message now or I will have you locked up for creating a public
disturbance."
"I have created no disturbance!" Matthew blurted out with astonishment. He never
anticipated such a response from anyone on the council, and he had not even revealed the
outlandish tale he was now forced to tell.
Consprite leaned ever so slightly forward in his chair, as if to emphasize his
conviction. "You just spoke of a message which will affect everyone in this town as well
as everyone in the land. Those were your words. Do you deny them?"
"No, but ..."
"But nothing. Those are the words of a rabble-rouser. They create panic and mob rule.
Now you will get on with what you have to say or I will have you locked up, and you will
never see the light of day again."
Matthew felt his knees grow weak. "You can't do that, you have no right."
"I have every right! I'm about to issue an order imposing martial law! That gives me
the right!"
Consprite caught himself before continuing. He cursed under his breath. He face was
now crimson and his anxiety was as obvious as ever. He uncrossed his arms and rubbed
his temples with his fingers.
Matthew stared disbelievingly at the mayor. "Martial law?"
The mayor did not respond other than cursing under his breath once more.
"You can't do that," the reader repeated himself.
The mayor stood up angrily, grabbed a paper from his desk and shook it at the reader.
"Yes, I can. And here's the order that proves it. If this doesn't convince you of how
serious I am, I don't know what will."
Before Matthew could say another word, Mappel stepped forward to the edge of the
mayor's desk.
"This has gone on long enough," the elf spoke with conviction before pulling the hood
of his cloak away from his head and removing the forester's cap. His pointed ears stood
revealed for all to see. "I am an elf, and as I believe every one in this room already
knows, the end of an age is here."
"Mother of bastards!" Consprite exclaimed, yet he revealed more despair than
disbelief. He did not question what he saw; he did not stare with gaping silence. Instead,
he dropped himself back into his chair as if capitulating. His large bottom hit the seat
with a resounding thump. He placed his left hand over his eyes as if trying to block out a
nightmare.
Matthew looked back and forth from the elder elf to the mayor. He could not fathom
Consprite's reaction. "You're not shocked?"
"Nothing can shock me anymore," Consprite moaned.
"What are you talking about?" Matthew beseeched. Nothing had gone even close to
his expectations. The reader imagined difficulty in gaining an audience with any of the
council, he anticipated outright dismissal of his story, and he expected downright
astonishment at the revelation of elves in their midst. The actual turn of events was
beyond his imagination. He stared dumbly at the mayor, waiting and hoping for a shred
of reason.
Consprite offered nothing. He grunted, he cursed, but he remained in his chair with his
hand over his face.
Mappel stepped forward ahead of the reader. He raised a hand from his staff
requesting Matthew refrain from further questions. He spoke with an explanation he
garnered from his own observations of the mayor. "It is the inevitable I fear. I expect this
man has already seen and heard of things far more surprising than the presence of elves.
He is the leader of this camp of humans as I am the leader of my camp of elves. Just as I
received reports as to the occurrences after the quake, I expect he has received the same.
The magic has returned, and no camp or town is safe from the effects. It is not so
surprising that this man already knows of the changes taking place."
"At first I didn't believe what I was hearing," Consprite mumbled. He dropped his
hand to his lap, stared at it rather than return Mappel's knowing gaze. "I thought the
reports were made by crackpots out in the wilderness too long. That's where they came
from at first. Stories from strangers coming in from the hills and the mountains up north.
Then more stories came in from the outlying farms. I had to send people out to
investigate. I lost two men to some kind of monster they couldn't even describe. It
surprised them at the river and ripped them apart with claws and teeth."
"It was a river rogue," Lief spoke for the first time since entering the office. "They
move as quickly on land as in the water. They have attacked my people as well."
Consprite glanced up with a look of desperation. "River rogue, huh? It's good to know
the names of creatures which shouldn't exist." He placed an inquisitive eye upon Lief. "I
guess you're an elf, too?"
Lief pulled off his cap in acknowledgment.
"That's just great." Consprite shook his head. "River rogues, elves. What do you call
the short, swollen-headed things that walk around the forests with crossbows?"
"They are goblins," Mappel answered softly.
"Well, I haven't seen one of those yet but the mayor from Burbon sent me a message
this morning. They've attacked Burbon twice in as many days." He shook his head as if to
expel the images of things he could not comprehend. Upon recalling a sight he could
bring to mind, his voice rattled with anguish. "I'll tell you what I did see with my own
eyes, a corpse, a moving corpse. It killed a farmer and two of his boys before my men
trapped it in a barn. I tell you that thing should not have been walking around. It was half
rotted. I could see bone, yet it kept banging at the doors to get out."
"Another of the undead," Lief muttered as he shook his head sadly.
Consprite boiled over with anger and frustration. He shot a wild stare at Lief. His eyes
remained wide and bloodshot. "What do you mean another? I had the one in the barn
destroyed! It took five men with axes to do it. They chopped it to pieces before it finally
stopped moving! We burned what was left. Then burned everything that touched it.
Blazes, I had my own clothes burned. Now you tell me there are more of these things.
How many more?"
"No one can tell," Lief answered simply.
"But you're sure there's more, aren't you?!" The mayor's nostrils flared as his eyes
made wild accusations toward the elf.
"No one can be sure of anything during these times," Mappel counseled coolly. "Our
own people are at a loss to understand everything which has happened or might happen."
"Loss? Loss?!" a crazed expression rippled across the cheeks of the mayor. He
glowered at the three men that stood before him. "Everything is out of control here and
you stand there telling me you're at a loss to understand what's happening? There's no
way to understand it! The dead are walking around killing people! There are monsters
doing the same near the rivers! And that's only the half of it. All these reports on my desk
... unheard of things. I thought the town was going nuts. Maybe it is. Maybe we all are.
One woman said her son was able to levitate. I laughed until I went over to see her. The
kid was floating around in the air! She thinks her son is possessed by demons. I didn't
want to believe any of this, but I can't shut my eyes to it!"
Mappel stood firm with his weight pressed against his staff. He listened carefully to
the words and the tone of the mayor. He watched even closer. Even as he stood within a
whirlwind of an emotional tirade, he found it near impossible to develop a true
assessment of this man.
The elder elf could read nothing beyond the mayor's immediate concerns. His
worthiness as a person, his tendencies toward righteousness or malevolence, remained
well disguised by a veneer of self-importance. The arrogance of the man drew clear by
the objects in which he surrounded himself. The desire for control became evident by his
outbursts. Unfortunately, neither characteristic assisted Mappel in making a moral
judgment. Such characteristics are present in almost every leader of every race.
"What you face, we all now face," Mappel spoke in earnest. "The humans are not
alone in this plight. Every creature that lives in the land faces the same danger. It is not
madness that overtakes you or your people. It is a challenge to all, to human, to elf, to
dwarf, to algor, to even the great cliff behemoth."
The mayor nearly laughed with exhaustion. "Is that supposed to make me feel better?
That's just great. I can go out and tell my people that everything is fine because we're not
alone. The elves and dwarves are facing the same problems."
"I don't think that is what he meant," Matthew offered.
"I know what he meant!" Consprite shouted. His expression turned cold as the
crimson hue ran from his face like water from a tap. His fists tightened to stop their
trembling and he took hold of the situation with all the resolve left within him. He would
no longer allow anyone but himself to dictate the subject of this meeting. He narrowed
upon their presence in his office and his focus turned upon their reasons. "Now listen to
what I have to say and know that I mean it. I want to know why you're here. As far as I'm
concerned you may be responsible for all that's going on. You came here with something
to say, and you'll say it to me now. If you don't, I'll lock you up and you'll never see the
light of day again. I don't know your two friends here, but I know you and your place in
this community. No one, other than your own followers, is going to even notice if you
drop off the face of the land. As for these two elves," he said the word with near disdain,
as if it were a foreign virus that had no business in the land of Uton. "I doubt if anyone
around here will miss them if they disappeared. People around here don't believe in elves
and dwarves."
At that threat, Lief moved forward with an agile step. His hand disappeared beneath
his cloak where it found the hilt of his two edged sword. He side stepped Mappel with
casual grace, the folds of his cloak barely rustling. He bore down upon the mayor with a
fiery anger of his own.
The elf's intentions were not lost upon the mayor, and Consprite's cold calculating
confidence took flight as his pallor turned gray. He sank back deep in his chair, searching
for protection and a retreat. His feet dug into the floor as he propelled the chair back
away from the oncoming elf. Beads of sweat rolled down his temples. The only noise
which erupted from his mouth was a low groan.
Matthew called out for Lief to contain his actions, but it was Mappel who stopped
him. He merely lifted an arm from his staff and swung it out like a gate which crossed
Lief's path. By itself, the thin aged arm could not have held back the younger, more
powerful elf. Lief would have plowed through that arm as if it were a thin rotted pine
branch, if it belonged to anyone else.
It belonged to Mappel, however, and Lief submitted to its authority. The angered elf
left his sword sheathed under his cloak. He even stepped back away from the mayor in
acceptance of Mappel's silent request.
The mayor coughed in uneasy relief, but maintained a watchful eye on the younger
elf. He pulled his chair back to his desk before wiping his head with a clammy hand. The
room now felt much too small for Consprite. He now felt trapped, the only exit blocked.
He rubbed his hands together, hoping to warm them and dry the perspiration he had
wiped from his temples. He gathered himself, drawing upon all his experience. In his best
fashion, he flushed signs of weakness from his expression. He continued to remain
watchful of Lief, but he finally set his attention back on Matthew.
"Now you look here," he mumbled, somewhat unsteady but not lacking in bitterness,
"I have had enough of this. You will speak now."
Matthew shook his head almost apologetically. He remained firm upon his earlier
stance. "I would rather speak to the whole council."
"Are you deaf man?" Consprite bellowed. "The council can not convene today. I've
already said that."
"Why not?"
"Because there is no council anymore." The mayor dropped his forehead into his left
hand. "Elizabeth Bent was killed by that thing in the barn. I had to inform the entire
council of what was going on, didn't want to face it by myself. She wouldn't believe me. I
took her out to see it for herself to convince her. Samuel Cofort went with us. Pig headed
woman, she wouldn't listen. She just about laughed at me when she threw open the barn
door, told me it was a spooked horse. It ripped her throat open. That's when I ordered the
men to destroy it. I had Bent's body burned. I didn't want to see her rise up like that other
thing. Cofort didn't stick around. He got sick right there and took off. I've sent people to
get him back here, but they can't find him. He's left town for sure. When I finally told the
other two council members of what happened they walked out. Last I heard, they locked
themselves in their houses. So there is no council. I'm in charge here. Me, alone! Got it?"
Matthew stared at the mayor vacantly before finding his voice. "I'm sorry. I didn't
know."
"Well, now you do. So whatever you have to say, say it to me."
Matthew faced this prospect with confusion, uncertainty. He tried to form his own
alternatives as he mumbled a response. "I don't know. It still affects the whole town.
Perhaps a new council should be put together, an emergency council."
Consprite nearly fell out of his chair. "Are you out of your mind?! To do that I would
have to tell people what's going on. Do you have any idea what that will cause? Panic!
Riot! We'll lose control of everything. I've had enough trouble keeping a lid on this as it
is. I only use people I can trust. Everyone here has sworn their secrecy to me. I intend to
keep this a secret until I can figure out what to do. Now you want me to just announce a
need for a new emergency council?! Forget it! The rest of this town knows nothing so
far and that's the way I intend to keep it."
"You will not be able to keep this a secret for long," Mappel said stoically. "I
understand your desire to maintain calm among your people, but there is no way it can be
accomplished. Very soon, they will all see things with their own eyes that you will not be
able to explain away. They will realize that the land is changing. I would suggest you
inform them as soon as possible."
"Just like that, huh?" Consprite laughed sarcastically. "Maybe I should just go out in
the street with a bell and tell them that the dead are rising, there are monsters in the
rivers, and elves in my office. What kind of response do you think I'll get?"
The humorous image was lost upon the elder elf. "I can not say. I have little
experience with your people."
Consprite laughed again, as if he finally found an escape from his inner turmoil.
"Well, I have a lot of experience. First they'll have me locked up; they won't believe any
of it until some of these things come marching up our main street. Then, they'll all panic.
They'll run in every direction at once, not caring who or what they run over. They'll take
what they can from wherever they can. They'll fight over horses and food before they
leave this town a burning cinder."
"That may happen regardless," Mappel proposed. "Who can say when a goblin raiding
party might target your town, or when a mountain shag wanders forward in search of
food. The changes around you are vast. The people of this town will see them. You may
temper the panic if you warn them."
Consprite bit down slightly on his lip. He exhaled heavily before casting a determined
stare at Matthew. "I will not talk in circles any more. You came here to tell me
something. I want to know what it is. What do you know about this?"
"I know what these elves have told me," Matthew said honestly.
"And what is that?"
"I would rather they tell you."
Consprite grimaced before turning his head to the elder elf.
"Well?" he said with an expectant tone.
Mappel did not hesitate in responding. "Whether you or your people wish to accept it,
the land is changing. The time you have known is over. If you doubt my word, simply
consider what you yourself have already seen. These things will not go away. They will,
in fact, get worse. You will not be able to hide the truth from the humans within the
structures of this camp, or in any other. You, however, will have to face these changes
more quickly than others. Connel has been selected as a meeting place for representatives
of other races. It is very possible that even this day living creatures strange to you will
indeed be walking down your main street. We have come to warn you now so that you
may take any necessary precautions to avoid the panic you speak of. As to whether you
accept this or not, that is beyond my control. It is not beyond my control, however, to
reveal myself to your people right at this moment. My very existence will create a stir
you will not be able to silence."
"I see." The mayor paused to consider thoughts of his own before proceeding. Quite
distinctly, the elf just posed a challenge of authority, a challenge this mayor was
accustomed to meeting. Consprite finally took hold of something of comfort. He now
viewed Mappel as a political adversary, and he attempted to create an atmosphere of
conflict. First, he decided to gain more information before deciding a course of action.
"You still haven't told me what's going on. You say the land has changed, but not why.
And why is Connel being used as this meeting place?"
"Connel was selected for its history. It was the battle ground of the Wizard War, the
last place all the races worked together."
"Sounds like a fairy tale to me," Consprite added, hoping to goad the elf into revealing
something he might have wished to keep hidden.
"Then I would also be a character in one of these tales. Yet, I stand before you now,
do I not?"
Matthew decided to add a fact which might add at least a shred of substance to the
story. "It also has a lot to do with Ryson Acumen," the reader revealed.
The mayor did not move his head. He only shifted his eyes toward Matthew. "That's
the delver we sent out to check the damages by the earthquake. What's he got to do with
this?"
"When I saw he was about to explore the lands after the quake, I asked him to send
reports back to me as well. I wished to know what caused the quake. As it happens,
Ryson was the first to come across these elves. Apparently he has assisted them. He also
spoke of me and thought I might help them."
"Why?"
"Because I am a follower of the Church of Godson. I would be most willing to accept
them for what they are."
"No, that’s not what I asked. Why do they need help? No one has told me what's
causing all of this. All you've said is why they came to Connel. That doesn't explain ...
Wait a minute!" He made a sideways glance at Matthew. He sized him up and read the
meaning within the unspoken words. "The quake. You sent Ryson to check out the quake
and that's when he came across these elves. It was after the quake when things went
haywire around here. That's the link, isn't it? This has all got something to do with that
quake, if it was a quake."
"What else could it have been?" Matthew posed with a nervous tone.
"Something that might explain what's going on here," the mayor said flatly. He noted
the reader's nervousness and grasped it. "I think you know, and I want you to tell me."
"The forces at work here are beyond one man's understanding," Mappel interceded,
hoping to quell the mayor's interest with the tremor. The elder elf was not sure of this
man's character, but he was sure he did not want to reveal the source of the quake, or the
fact that the sphere existed within the walls of Sanctum.
Consprite, however, honed in upon Mappel's words. Forces. The word blinked in his
mind. It meant power, and power of this magnitude interested him. He considered his
options, weighed them carefully, and finally spoke with cold calculation.
"It may be beyond my understanding, but I wish to know more of what caused this
quake. I have a feeling it may shed some light on what I've been facing and even why
you're here."
"We are here as the first representatives from other races to come to Connel." Mappel
spoke with careful conviction. He hoped to make it clear his intentions should not be
questioned. "It is here we will decide how to deal with the changes we all face."
The mayor failed to accept the elder elf's authority. In Consprite's world, power
created authority, and as of yet, the struggle between them had not yet been decided.
"That doesn't tell me what caused this change," Consprite persisted. He decided to
play an ace. "Now, I want to go back to this quake. It seems you're rather uncomfortable
talking about it. I can't make you tell me what it is you know, but I can do this. There are
other delvers here in Connel. There are also human trackers which I trust very much. I
might simply send one or more of them out just as Acumen went out. I can get the
answers myself."
Mappel stood silent. He turned to Matthew, then to Lief. Dealing with humans was
foreign to him. Dealing with humans that made a career out of reading, understanding,
and even redirecting the wants and desires of others, posed a challenge for which he was
not prepared. The elves of his camp accepted his word and authority without challenge.
This human would not.
Consprite noted the uncomfortable gaze of the elder elf. He sensed the confusion and
concern like a shark senses the distress of another fish. He wanted to smile but he kept his
emotions hidden. This was a battle he was determined to win.
He did not allow the elf time to regroup his thoughts, he pressed the elder. "Now that I
think about it, it's very clear that the quake which rolled past this town must be directly
related to the events of the past few days. But I don't think it's the quake itself that
disturbs you. It's the secret behind the quake. It's big enough to cause you elves to come
out of hiding. It apparently is important to others as well. Something about dwarves, and
algors. You said yourself that there are other representatives coming to Connel. I'm
beginning to think that you're trying to keep something from me which I should know
about."
Consprite watched the elf carefully. The pained reaction he witnessed informed him
his calculated assumption was correct. He now stared expectantly at Mappel.
Mappel moved his hands slightly about his staff and repositioned his feet as he
weighed his response. He now believed that meeting with this man was a mistake. He
considered simply turning and leaving.
Maybe Connel was not the place for this. Perhaps they would have been better off in a
town closer to the wilderness, closer to the forest. Pinesway. Or Burbon, where the
goblins already attacked twice. Maybe if the elves had been there to fight them off they
would have gained the trust and acceptance of the humans. At least the humans of
Burbon would already have witnessed the existence of creatures far stranger to them than
dwarves or elves. Yes, Burbon now seemed a welcome retreat, an escape from this
walled chamber where he now stood, an escape from this man that now asked the wrong
questions.
Only one thing held Mappel in his place, the hope that he was directed to Connel for a
reason. Ryson Acumen, the Reader Matthew; these men were assets to his cause. He
realized this. And Connel; Connel was a place of legend with its ancient wall still mostly
intact. To give up on Connel meant giving up on a larger hope. Leaving meant accepting
their fate was in their own hands, with no outside force guiding their actions.
"No," Mappel said to himself.
It was barely above a whisper but all heads turned toward him.
"Does that mean you're not hiding something from me or that you wish not to tell me
what is truly going on?" the mayor questioned with a raised eyebrow.
"It means simply that I can not base my decisions on the accepted ways of the past,"
Mappel said with renewed strength in his voice. "The age of separation is over. The elves
can not hide from the humans any longer. Neither can the dwarves, nor the algors, nor
any other race. We must learn to deal with humans and humans must accept us and the
new way of life we all face."
Mappel's fateful decision was made. To leave for Burbon or the wilderness meant
accepting that Ryson's appearance in the forest was nothing more than coincidence. It
meant that Connel held no significance. Mappel could not accept that.
The mayor, however, maintained a challenging tone. "Does that mean you're going to
explain to me what this new way of life is and what's causing it?"
Mappel went forward with his decision. He remained, however, cautious in his
response.
"You are correct in your assumption Mayor Consprite. The earthquake you felt
signified something much more important than a simple shift in the land itself. You may
not yet understand the scope of my explanation, but if you consider your own experience
I expect you will. Magic is again free in the land."
The mayor scoffed but kept his attention locked upon the elder elf.
Mappel continued unfailingly. "I do not know your concepts of magic. It must be
foreign to you for it has been absent for many of your generations. Your own history, as
you understand it, is probably devoid of the true nature of what existed before the humans
took command of the land. From what Matthew tells me, only a mere handful even
respect the Book of Godson. That in itself tells me that the main body of your race will
most likely doubt the truth. They will resist what they will see, but they will not help
seeing it.
"And they will see this new age. Whether it is an age of destruction or an age of
rebirth is yet to be seen. But none of your people will be able to hide from the truth. The
magic is returning. It is the source of all these reports." Mappel waved his hand over the
mayor's desk.
"Your stories of the undead and of levitation are but the beginning. If you wish to
deny the existence of magic, how will you deny the consequences? Spell energy spills
over the land. In ways, it can be used, as seen by the boy that discovered the spell of
levitation. It has also brought back the creatures of dark wishes, such as the river rogue
and the goblins.
"These are but some of the consequences, but know this, the magic returns with the
taint of destruction." The elf's tone grew with authority as he issued this warning. "It is
beyond good, it is beyond evil. It returns with a purpose of obliteration, a purpose it can
fulfill. It moves of its own desire. Uncontrolled and mutated energy alters the very fabric
of the land. That can be already seen in the appearance of the undead. No current wizard
cast a spell to raise the corpse which attacked your people. That is partially the taint of
this uncontrolled power. The magic is not pure. Some of the very energies still maintain
the direction of spells cast hundreds and hundreds of cycles ago. If allowed unfettered, it
will wipe the land free of life, all life. Thus, we return to Connel, return to make yet
another stand together to fight the magic just as we did long ago."
The mayor allowed Mappel's pause to fill the room with silence for long moments.
Finally, he pressed with what he believed to be a major point of interest. "This magic you
speak of, it seems you're saying that this is what's causing all of the strange occurrences.
That may or may not be true. I personally can't offer any other explanation, but I still
have more questions that I would like answered. What has caused the magic to return,
where does it come from?"
The mayor thought the elf might hesitate, show weakness, but he did not.
Mappel addressed the mayor with nobility as well as authority. "It comes from the
land. It was buried long ago, but it has gained the awareness to free itself." Mappel saw
no advantage to revealing all to the mayor. He was truthful in his response, though not
complete. He judged it unwise to reveal the existence of such a powerful talisman as the
sphere. "Humans played their part in the Wizard War, and even though most chose to
forget this history, it is part of the legends of the land. The alliance of races defeated the
magic casters, and the magic was buried in the land to prevent future misuse. The tremor
which passed through your town was a signal the magic had been released. That is what
is happening to your town. That is what is happening to the entire land. Now, elves,
dwarves, algors, delvers and even humans must put aside their mistrust and again work
together to end this threat. That is why I am here and why others will soon come."
At first the mayor said nothing. He unfolded his hands and began lightly tapping his
fingers upon his desk. He cast a glance over the papers strewn before him; he then looked
up at the pointed ears of the two elves which stood in front of him. He noted the
expectant look from the reader, then turned his chair slightly to his left. His gazed up at a
portrait of his grandfather that hung proudly upon the wall. The face in the painting stared
back blankly.
"Hmmph," the mayor muttered and shook his head. He paused again, trying to tie the
loose ends together. If the story was true, it meant he could do little to return the town
back to its previous state of normalcy. No matter what he attempted, panic would most
certainly reign. If it were not true, he would be left with no reasonable explanation for the
wild events or even the pointed eared people that stood before him.
Only one element offered him any sense of enthusiasm, and that was the existence of
such powerful energy. If the bizarre story was true, then this magic was the basis for
extraordinary power. That thought enticed him. He almost began salivating. This thought
led him to speak.
"I will accept your story, and I will do what I can to help you. I will, however, request
that when it comes to dealing with the people of this town, you follow my advice. If you
are hesitant about this, I will tell you this as a fact. If we go out and simply announce
your story and what is happening, I can guarantee two things. There will be mass panic
and they'll either throw us out of town as a bunch of loons or hang us for being
responsible."
Mappel immediately turned to Matthew for council on this point.
"He's probably right," the reader conceded. "People will not simply accept what is
happening. They will look right in the face of a monster and still refuse the truth. Very
few will take this without causing a riot."
"Mob rule is an ugly thing," the mayor added with dramatic accents. "Confused angry
citizens can react in ways totally opposite their normal law abiding nature. We ourselves
may get ripped apart, torn to pieces by crazed men unwilling to accept what you say."
"That may be," Mappel noted, "but the truth can not be hidden from them forever."
"No it can't, but we can ease them into it. I ask that you allow me to maintain a low
profile on this. Let's keep things as quiet as possible and avoid raising any immediate
hysteria."
Mappel, while not sensing the true desire of the mayor, still foresaw difficulties. "How
can we avoid that? Hopefully, representatives of the algors and the dwarves will be here
within a day or two. The humans in your town can not simply ignore their arrival."
"They don't have to see their arrival," Consprite pressed. "You came into town without
raising a stir."
"But we hid our arrival. And our appearance is more or less quite like your own. We
simply place a hood upon our head, and any visual difference remains unseen. It is not
the case for the others."
"We can keep them from being seen at all," Consprite insisted. "I have men working
for me that I trust; men that, to a degree, already know of what is happening. I can send
them out to meet these guests. They can bring them into town quietly and unobserved."
"I don't know."
Consprite decided to throw one last ace. He played upon the fears he stirred earlier,
and again mentioned the high likelihood of outward hostility. "Think of this alternative.
One of these strangers walks into town unescorted in plain sight of everyone. Word starts
getting out of monsters. What do you think will happen? I'll tell you. The people will
grab clubs and spears and swords and attack the stranger with such viciousness that you
will not believe what you see. That is what fear and confusion will do. Will it help your
cause if the people you wish to speak to are killed upon entering the streets? Take my
word for it; it is the safest way for all involved."
Again Mappel looked towards Matthew, unable to discern how much truth existed in
the words of the mayor. The reader could only whisper that such was possible.
Mappel grudgingly accepted. "There is truth in what you say. It will not help to renew
an alliance if any representative is attacked, but I remain wary of leaving the members of
your town in the dark about the changes they must all someday face."
"Let them face it gradually," Consprite said firmly. "Otherwise they will react
violently. That's what people do when faced with sudden change. Let me deal with it. In
the end, it is my responsibility. Would you have someone tell you how to handle the
elves? I doubt it. You must allow me the same."
"Very well," Mappel said with a heavy sigh. "I will accept you know how to deal with
your people as I would expect you to accept my authority regarding the elves."
"Very good. I will give the order to have guards posted at the outskirts of the towns
and on watch for arriving strangers. I will issue them the fastest horses and they will
scour the outer farms with diligence. Where should I have your guests brought?"
"To my church," Matthew replied quickly.
Lief stirred. He had moved away from the mayor, but he had remained observant of all
that was said. "How will the elf guards or Ryson Acumen know what the human escorts
have in mind? If an elf guard is approached by a human on horseback, it is likely the
exchange will not begin pleasantly."
Mappel took one hand from his staff and placed it upon his chin. "We will have to
alert our camp of this," he said stoically. "Though I am adverse to such, you will have to
leave my side to send word to our camp."
Consprite seized an opportunity to offer a favor to the elves, a favor he hoped to
collect upon in the immediate future. "I can have fresh horses prepared for him. If the trip
is not far, and goes through nearby towns, I can see to it he's back quickly."
Lief refused vehemently. "I will not need a horse when I reach the trees."
"But you will not have to go far into the trees to do what must be done," Mappel
interrupted. "You need only reach the outskirts of Dark Spruce and call to a perimeter
sentry. The elf guard can relay the message back to our camp. You can ride from here to
Pinesway and then back. A horse will return you to my side quicker and so it should be
done."
The mayor smiled. "Fine. That makes things easy. I can have a fresh horse sent to the
church right now, and have another waiting for you at Pinesway for your return trip." The
mayor then spoke with a guarded yet questioning tone. "I have one more question for
you. You spoke of representatives of other races. Who will be representing my people?"
Uneasiness filled the room. Matthew looked about absently. He wished to make no
comment.
Mappel shifted the grip on his staff. He looked back and forth from the mayor to the
reader. "That has not really been decided as of yet. For the moment, the reader Matthew
is acting as an intermediary. His knowledge of the legends has allowed for an easier
communication of the problems we face."
"That's fine, but don't you think you should be consulting someone that understands
all of the people? Reader Matthew represents the followers of the Church of Godson. I
would think you should include me in any of your decisions which might affect this town.
After all, I am the duly elected official of Connel, and it is Connel which has much at
stake." The sentence was punctuated by Consprite's almost harsh, questioning stare.
"I can not say whether that is wise or not," Mappel offered, hoping for an escape from
this new dilemma. He fished for a quick response which might rationalize keeping the
mayor at bay. "We need those that will understand the legends, those that will offer
knowledge of the past beyond your recorded history."
"Yet you also need someone who will assist you in how things are run in the present,"
the mayor nudged the elder elf. "If you expect assistance or even acceptance from the
people of this town, you simply must gain the backing of someone in authority. At the
present, I am that someone."
Mappel grunted with dissatisfaction. "I do not know. There are other concerns. You
must realize that this is not simply between the elves and the humans. Representatives of
other races will also be involved. Others may question your presence. It is not only my
decision. I would not want to insult the other leaders by simply accepting you. I would be
stepping beyond my experience and knowledge."
The mayor was not put off, not for a moment. "But it sounds as if it was your decision
to meet at Connel. And it was your decision to speak with the reader. You seem to have
more power over this than you're willing to admit. Now, I can't claim complete
understanding, but I already know of what has been happening around this town. Even
the reader can't say that. I also offered you assistance with the gathering of the strangers
you wish to bring here. I expect that entitles me to be informed of what's going on, what
other decisions you might make, and how Connel will be affected. For the last, I will
demand that, no matter what your wishes are. I am still the mayor here."
Mappel wished to speak of this no further. He might have found it difficult to read the
intentions of Consprite, but he knew he did not like the mayor's insistence at being
included within all their decisions. Uneasily, he made one more attempt to sway
Consprite toward a lesser role.
"You will be alerted to all things which might directly affect your people and this
town. That seems to be more than a reasonable request. We will also defer to you as the
authority in how to deal with all matters involving the general population of Connel. If
any services are needed, such as horses, blacksmiths, forgers or craftsman, we will of
course come to you. We will also alert you to any of our activities which might, even in
the slightest way, gain the attention of any of the townspeople. As to your request for
being a representative for our discussions, I must defer on that decision. You will simply
have to accept that of all the races, the humans have gained the most distrust of the
others. The dwarves, the algors, even the elves have lived to remain hidden from your
people. The humans themselves have shown a desire to forsake the past and to ignore the
legends. Indeed, for the past hundreds of seasons, the humans even refuse to accept the
existence of other races. Even you can not deny that."
Mappel paused to let the mayor speak. He looked at Consprite, expecting him to reply.
"I won't deny that your presence is new to me, but ..."
Mappel spoke quickly to cut off further remarks. "But that is what I must focus upon.
Can you even tell me of the legends which are now central to what we face?"
"I do not know of ..."
Again Mappel seized the opportunity to direct the conversation. "And you should not
be blamed for not knowing. It was not your way, but it is of great importance at this
moment. The trial we face is based upon legends contained in elflore, dwarf tales, and
even the Book of Godson. You pointed out that I decided to meet with the Reader
Matthew. That is because he is familiar with the legends I speak of."
The mayor glared in frustration at being interrupted in both cases.
Mappel continued with reverence. "Since humans have forgotten the past, it is not
unreasonable for us to first meet with those that will have a better understanding of what
we face."
Consprite frowned sourly. He knew Mappel had seized a small victory in temporarily
sealing him from the intended meetings. He was about to make one final attempt to
reassert himself when the door to his office flung open.
A woman not known to Consprite pushed forward and out of the reach of the mayor’s
assistant, Kendal, who followed behind her with outstretched hands. The woman revealed
an immediate sense of relief at finding the reader. She also maintained a look of
bewildered excitement.
"Thank Godson I found you," she spoke with heavy breaths.
"Rachael?" Matthew turned to her and caught her arm.
Kendal tried to move further into the room, but Lief stepped in front of him with a
menacing scowl. His agility surprised the assistant, who almost turned and ran back out
of the office. He gathered himself quickly as he caught the familiar and questioning face
of the mayor. At first the assistant wished to question the presence of such strange men
with pointed ears, but Kendal had already witnessed far stranger things these past few
days. As the mayor's chief aide, he was privy to the reports of nearly every occurrence.
He wrote most of them out himself.
"I'm sorry, sir," Kendal said with a heavy breath, as he stepped slightly back and away
from Lief. He tilted the upper half of his body to the left to gain a clear view of the
mayor. "I tried to stop her, but she ran past me."
Matthew ignored the assistant. "What is it, Rachael?"
"He's back!" she blurted out.
Matthew was about to ask who she was referring to, but the excitement on her face
made the answer clear. He held his tongue and spoke reassuringly to the wide-eyed
woman. "It's alright, Rachael. We expected him."
The reader then turned to the mayor. "You'll have to excuse her. Like you, I have also
kept things from my people. Little surprises like this are bound to occur."
The mayor said nothing. He sized up the words of the reader along with the continued
excitement of the woman.
Interesting, he thought to himself.
Matthew wished to waste no further time with the mayor. He had questions himself.
Although he could guess as whose arrival excited Rachael so, he could not fathom how
he returned so quickly. He had sent word out only this morning. In truth, he had no idea
where to send his messengers. He only pinpointed the closest churches of their faith
hoping they might have an idea. He believed the hardest part would be trying to find him.
It was unthinkable that any messenger could have located him so quickly. Perhaps, even
the will of Godson was aiding them now.
"Mayor," Matthew announced, "you must forgive us, but I must leave. I will keep you
informed as to those things that will affect Connel. If you have your guards bring our
newly arriving guests to our church, I will appreciate it. I'm sure we will meet with you
again to discuss any questions that arise between now and then."
He said nothing more as he turned his back on Consprite. He led Rachael and the two
elves quickly out of the mayor's office.
The mayor bit back an order for them to stay. He watched dubiously as all but his
assistant walked from his office.
When they had left, he motioned for Kendal close the door.
"I want someone placed on watch outside that church of theirs," Consprite growled. "I
want it watched night and day without their knowledge, and I want someone we can trust.
I also want you to get me a tracker, a human tracker. Get word to Evan Chase. I have a
job for him. There's a delver I want tracked."
The assistant nodded, he considered asking about the men with the pointed ears, but
decided against it. He recognized the tone of the mayor. Silently, he went to open the
door. As his hand hit the knob, Consprite gave one more order, a strange order to his ears
at least.
"And get me a copy of the Book of Godson."


Reader Matthew walked briskly, nearly trotting, as Mappel, Lief and Rachael
followed his direct and unerring path back to the church. He did not glimpse over his
shoulder even once to check on them. He simply expected them all to follow. He ignored,
as well, the growing number of eyes which fell upon them.
The morning's mist had given way to a clear, bright day, and the number of town
residents on the streets swelled with the growing warmth. The two elves had returned the
caps to their heads to avoid attracting attention, but the reader and his faith were known
to most. As he passed, flanked by strangers, his robust pace fanned more than one passerby's curiosity.
With the hoods of their cloaks pulled up over their hats, the elves appeared as nothing
more than foresters wearing too much clothing for a gorgeous, clear day. They matched
step with the reader, as only Rachael seemed to have difficulty in keeping stride, and
neither elf questioned the reader, even when they exited Consprite's office with great
haste. They followed obediently, especially as it pleased them both to again be outdoors
and away from the sterile smell of the mayor's office.
Lief particularly welcomed the warm sun on his face. The open air brought a renewed
sense of freedom. The blue sky overhead reminded him that no ceiling confined him. He
drank in the sweet air. For a moment, he allowed himself a quick glance westward. He
could not see the tree tops of his home, but he knew they were there. It was all he could
do to keep from tearing off his outer cloak and race away from this town.
Mappel, although grateful to break free from the mayor's probing questions, became
more attentive of Matthew's excitement. Before this moment, before Rachael abruptly
announced the appearance of some unknown visitor, the reader walked with a slow sure
step, avoiding attention, carefully navigating the most unobtrusive path. At this moment,
that was no longer the case. He now stepped fervently, caring little for crowds or
gawking onlookers. Mappel could only surmise that the reader held great expectations for
the new arrival announced by the woman follower of Godson.
"Is he inside?" the reader asked Rachael with near booming exuberance as the group
reached the steps of the church.
"Yes, he's in your chambers."
Matthew turned and ran up the stone stairs, his feet passing beyond every other step.
He grabbed the door and yanked it open. It swung to its full length before it thudded
against the stone door stop. It vibrated for but a moment, until its own great weight
brought it to a motionless halt. Matthew was through the door in but a heartbeat. Before
another such beat, he had already vanished beyond the line of sight of those that
followed.
Rachael also moved quickly up the stairs. She grabbed the door handle, but waited
patiently for the two strangers to follow her inside before she swung it closed. Once all
were inside, she set off down a small corridor and disappeared through a door in a far
back corner of the church.
Mappel and Lief looked about curiously. The main room of worship now contained
several more anxious people. They totaled barely more than a dozen, but their whispers
buzzed with excitement and sent an echoing hum through the rafters. In comparison to
the space available to them within this building which was more like a fortress than a
church, their number appeared meager at best. They could no more fill the many benches
which lined the open space than Mappel's camp of elves could fill the branches of all the
trees in Dark Spruce Forest. Yet, from what the elder elf remembered of Matthew's
words, this must represent a great majority of the church's followers.
Those within barely heeded the arrival of the elves. In fact if either Lief or Mappel had
removed their caps, it was doubtful that any would have noticed. Instead, they chattered
nervously, excitedly among themselves. They looked pensively toward the hallway which
led to Matthew's personal chamber.
"What should we do?" Lief asked softly while keeping a watchful eye on the people
that continued to ignore them.
"Let us move to a seat in the back where we will remain inconspicuous to these
people. I assume the reader will summon us when the time is proper."
The church members paid them no mind. Their attention remained centered upon the
passage to Matthew's chamber.
Both elves took satisfaction in the small respite, and neither felt at all uneasy with the
present number of humans, a humble and unassuming lot.
Lief took the opportunity to look about the large open space which represented the
heart of the church. For the most part, it remained simple. It was void of any relics or
symbols which might connect it to the faith of Godson. The walls made of powerful
stone, rose up to the thick wooden rafters of the roof. The benches stood aligned with a
walkway down the center, leading away from the front door. At the path's end, a simple
platform stood innocuously and just high enough to allow a clear view of a speaker.
Lief's further inspection was cut short by the sudden appearance of the reader. He
broke from the passageway into the vast open space alone. He took but a few steps
toward the center before stopping to address the other followers who immediately ceased
their chatter.
"Friends, it is not my intention to keep things from you. I would have you all involved
with what must be considered, if I could. Unfortunately, I am not even sure if it is my
place to be included in what must be discussed here today. Please bear with me for but a
few moments."
The reader turned, but not back to his chamber. After scanning the room, his eyes fell
upon the two seated in the back. He moved to them almost as quickly as he raced up the
steps of the church. He leaned over Mappel and whispered so as no one else could hear.
As the other church members watched silently, Mappel nodded and made but a
passing remark to his companion.
Lief rose and headed to a side door which Rachael had previously used. In but a
moment, he was behind a closed door. It was time for him to send word to the elf sentries
of Dark Spruce.
Upon Lief's exit, Mappel turned his head back to the reader. They exchanged
messages inaudible to the others. He then stood and followed Matthew to the center of
the room, to within the very midst of the other followers. They gathered around the elf
and the reader curiously, expectantly.
It was Mappel who spoke. He stood still, his hands gently clasping his staff. Only his
head turned about to meet the questioning gazes of those that now surrounded him.
"Do not blame the reader for keeping you in the dark over what has been happening
here. It was never his intention to hide anything from you. If you must blame someone of
that, blame me. I will tell you now, what only a select others might know. You will
understand, for your following allows you an appreciation for the land as it was." He tried
not to pause, but he could not help stopping to inhale deeply before speaking his next
sentence. "The Sphere of Ingar has broken free from its entombment, and the magic has
returned to the land."
Mumblings erupted, but soon all quieted to hear further explanation.
Mappel held them calm with his reassuring voice and patient eyes. "I know you will
find this difficult to accept. I have been told such a thing has not been prophesied for you.
I can only say that such an event was also not included in elflore. I know such a thing, for
I am an elf."
With these words, he removed his cap and cloak and tossed them upon a nearby
bench. He did so with a confident assurance, as if he knew exactly how those that
surrounded him would react. He remained still for long seconds to allow the others a
moment to vent their surprise. Indeed, the room was filled with gasps of shock and
mumbles of disbelief. As the room finally quieted once more, Mappel concluded his
address.
"The events which are now unfolding are difficult for us all. Yet face them we must.
And we must face them together. I ask that all of you keep this to yourselves. The reader
has assured me you are capable of such and I have no cause to doubt that. The interpreter
has returned to you. He has returned to discuss the sphere. As your reader has said, he
does not wish to keep secrets from you, but I will ask your indulgence. I must speak to
the interpreter. There are things we both must know. I would ask that I may do this in
private with only the Reader Matthew present. For now, this is how it must be done."
Mappel turned and walked from the small crowd and toward Matthew's chamber.
The reader lingered but for a moment to allow himself one last reassurance to the
other followers. He then followed quickly after Mappel.
Matthew took the lead after turning a small corner and guided the elf back to his
chamber. The door remained open as Matthew stepped inside. With great respect, he
presented the elder elf to the interpreter.
Mappel walked purposefully into the chamber with dignified grace, almost as if he
expected to meet royalty. He came to an abrupt halt upon witnessing the appropriately
named interpreter. While Mappel knew little of the current customs and culture of the
humans, he was well aware of their short life span, especially as compared to the
longevity of the elf. He knew they grew old quickly. In but the turn of a handful of
seasons, their lives past and age made its mark upon their faces. He thus expected a
wizened old man. At the very least, a senior to the reader. That is not what he found.
The youthful interpreter leapt from his chair with a broad smile and the energy of a
young deer at play. He could not keep his eyes from the tips of Mappel's ears even as he
held out a sturdy hand to grip Mappel's. His eyes sparkled with enthusiasm, rather than
surprise.
"An elf," he said almost joyously. "By the wisdom of Godson, an elf!" He laughed a
gleeful laugh. "You don't know how happy it makes me to see you."
Matthew moved past, but as he did, he noted the bewildered expression pulling upon
Mappel's cheeks. He cleared his throat lightly before speaking to make introductions.
"Mappel, this is Stephen Clarin. We also refer to him as the interpreter. Stephen, this
is Mappel. He is an elder and leader from an elfin camp in Dark Spruce Forest."
Before the interpreter could utter another word in greeting, Mappel turned upon the
reader. He had pulled his hand away from Stephen's grip as if it were nothing more than
an illusion.
"This young man is your interpreter?" Mappel could not withhold his question nor
mask his disbelief.
Stephen took no insult at the inquiry as he responded for the reader.
"I am that," he spoke cheerily while continuing to steal yet another glance at the
unique ears. "Not what you expected am I?"
"No you are not," Mappel replied as he allowed himself to glance over Stephen's
entire young body. "I do not wish to offend you, but I must admit I do not understand
this. It does not fit with the rest of the story I have been told."
"What story is that?" Stephen asked. His eyes twinkled even brighter, as if he was
privy to some joke no one else in the room was aware of.
Mappel's grip tightened about his staff. His voice rang with confusion. "That you
came to this church ten complete cycles of the land ago, yet you appear less than thirty
cycles now."
"I am twenty-six," the interpreter said with no shame.
"That would have made you sixteen upon your previous arrival to this church."
"Yes, it would."
"A boy of sixteen interpreting the prophecies of Godson to elders of the church?" The
thought seemed so preposterous, so out of place for the elf. For but a moment, he pictured
himself taking council from an elf of sixteen. Outlandish! Where was the wisdom of
anything to be gained in but sixteen precious cycles of the land, let alone the ability to
interpret such things as the prophecies of Godson?
Stephen could not withhold a chuckle. "Yes, I'm afraid that's true. And I can't tell you
how difficult that made things. Luckily, the followers of Godson are more willing to
overlook such things; more likely than the town regulars."
"Please explain to me how this can be." Mappel swam in a sea of apprehension as he
made his plea. More than just disbelief now threatened to take hold of him. He had placed
great hope upon this interpreter, hope that secrets of Sanctum might unravel within the
combined understandings of elflore and the Book of Godson. Such expectations grew out
of the high regard that the reader had placed in the interpreter, but the presence of this
young man now nearly dashed such hopes. How could any one so young be
knowledgeable to any great extent over such ancient and intricate composition?
Stephen retook his chair as Mappel deferred an equal invitation and placed his staff
upon the floor for support. The interpreter sunk happily into a relaxed state. Unlike the
mayor, he took a non-challenging position in his tone and his expression. When he spoke,
his words carried a simple ease and a self assurance. Apparently, he found no offense in
being questioned over his age and revealed no hesitation in making an explanation.
"People have said I was born with a gift. I do not wish to make any such judgments. I
will simply say that Godson wishes to reveal the secrets of his prophecies, the secrets of
the future, to the followers of his word. I have been chosen for that task. When I was very
young, perhaps nothing more than an infant in your eyes, I sensed things before they
happened. Everyone around me wanted to take advantage of what I could do. I was
pushed and prodded. I faced constant demands. I began to hate what I was and what I
could do. But that's a boring story, filled with self pity. Luckily, I realized I was allowed
my ability for a greater purpose than to make others wealthy and famous. Now, I accept
my fate, though I would appreciate it if you do not throw my name about with casual
ease. You never know who might remember me. As for now, I simply move with the path
that Godson makes for me.
"That's a rather simple summary of my life, but its enough to get my point across. You
wonder how someone so young could be able to provide the insight necessary to
understand the prophecies. I tell you it has nothing to do with what I have learned or what
I have done. It is the will of Godson and He doesn't seem to care how old I am. I was led
to this task and the Church of Godson just as I was led to you now."
Mappel raised an eyebrow. "Why would you say that? It was the messenger sent by
Matthew that called your attention here. What makes you think it is the will of Godson?"
"I never spoke to any messenger," Stephen responded flatly.
Mappel turned a questioning glance towards the reader. His expression made it very
clear he expected confirmation of such a statement.
Matthew answered the unspoken question. "It's true. None of my messengers returned
with him. In fact, I wondered how he could have gotten here so soon. We only sent word
out this morning. I thought it might have just been pure luck that one of them came across
him in a nearby town, but that's not the case. He began his trip several days ago."
Mappel turned his attention back to the interpreter.
"Why?" It was spoken cold and hard.
The bubbling happiness in the interpreter dimmed ever so slightly. "I know what's
happening. In my mind, I can see the sphere. Even now, it is still in the midst of Sanctum.
It has broken the reflectors which cast the energies back into its center. It's sending out
magic at will through a long break in the wall of the mountain. It will continue to do so
until it is stopped. I can see this as I saw other things just as significant. I sensed your
meeting with the delver. The reader tells me his name is Ryson Acumen. I can tell you
this, that delver's importance to us all has not ended. Keep him with you in whatever you
do."
Mappel suddenly released a surprising burst of anger and impatience. He had given no
warning to such an eruption, but he boiled over with demands. "Do not dare talk in
riddles to me! Tell me what you know of my meeting and Ryson Acumen. Tell me the
importance of the delver. If you truly understand what we face, then you know the danger
as well. I will not stand here and play games with you. If you are blessed by Godson then
you will happily reveal to me what to do and how this tragedy will unravel. If you wish to
test me with riddles, I will mark you as a messenger of dark creatures, of those that wish
to bring turmoil to the land rather than save it, or perhaps even of the sphere itself!"
Mappel stared holes through the young man. He could not say if it was his tense
dealing with the mayor or his growing anxiety over the poison magic which filled the air,
but he knew his patience had worn thin. He would not stand there with this boy and play
a guessing game over what was important and what was not. If the boy could see the
outcome of this trial, he would know of it now.
Any last trace of a smile left the interpreter's face. Sadness and guilt replaced the
sparkle in his previously bright eyes. He exhaled once heavily. He spoke with his own
frustration and sadness. "I'm sorry. It wasn't my intention to leave you with riddles. I'm
not doing it on purpose anyway. I know it sounded like that, but sometimes I just don't
know how to put things. The truth is that I don't know the exact importance of Ryson
Acumen, not yet anyway. And I don't know what you should do, or what anyone of us
should do, or how this will end up. My ability to understand what will happen or what
can happen is limited. I'm allowed to see what I'm allowed to see. I only know that this
delver remains important to us all."
The elder elf looked deeply into the interpreter. With a grunt, he accepted Stephen's
explanation. His tone, however, remained as dubious as ever. "So because of this insight
of yours, you knew I was coming to Connel in hopes of finding a way to enter Sanctum
safely and destroy the sphere?"
"That's right."
"Do you see anything else?" It was spoken more of a command than a request.
The interpreter spoke openly of what he knew. "I see that you will bring all the races
together here. Each race knows that something is terribly wrong. They will all meet with
you."
Mappel found hope in those words and chose to seize upon it. "Will they assist; will
they reveal the secrets of Sanctum?"
"I don't know, but I know only a small party will enter the mountain. I can't tell you
what that means."
Mappel brought a hand to his chin and stroked it as he considered the thought. He
brought his stare back to the interpreter. "How sure of this are you?"
"It will happen."
"I see. You seem to be very sure of this, which brings me to another question. In my
talks with Matthew, he had revealed that you predicted every important event which
would affect the people of this church. Why did you miss this most important
occurrence?"
"I don't know, but I have a theory."
"I would like to know it." Again, it was spoken as a command.
Stephen hesitated for the first time. He repositioned himself in his chair as if
something was poking him in the back. His discomfort seemed to grow as he spoke. "I
don't believe this was supposed to happen. For some reason, I think it might actually be
defying even the will of Godson. Understand; it is very hard for me to say that. I have
gone through life believing that nothing could defy that will, that the prophesies would be
ours without doubt. Now, I'm not so sure, and that scares me."
Mappel pressed beyond Stephen's hesitancies. "As well it should, but what makes you
believe this? Even Matthew admits that he can not find the prophesies which point to this
moment, but he himself stated the races would reunite. This is causing that reunification."
"No, it isn't," Stephen said resolutely.
Mappel was taken aback by this determined response. "What makes you say that? You
yourself said that the races will all unite here at Connel. Are you now saying that
prediction may not unfold?"
"No, they will all be here, but this will not cause a re-unification. It's only temporary.
It will not end the true separation. It will only serve as a reminder for the humans that
other races exist. However this turns out, the races will again go their separate ways."
Stephen noted the probing eyes of the elder elf. He continued with his explanation as
clearly as possible. "I know what you're thinking. You're wondering if I know this, then
why can't I see the conclusion of your plans. I told you before I don't know how this will
end, and that's true. It's because for the first time in my life I see two possible outcomes.
That has never happened before. Either the sphere will be destroyed or it shall remain
intact to destroy everything in the land. But whichever happens, I know the races will
again divide. They will either separate in fear of the sphere, or they will return to their
previous lives."
"You see two possible outcomes?" Matthew asked with an expression close to agony.
"Yes, I do."
The reader dropped his forehead into his hand. His anxious fingers caressed his own
temples as if attempting to press the disconcerting thoughts from his mind. "Then there is
no set destiny here for us."
"It seems so."
Mappel began to uncharacteristically pace the room. Instead of standing still with his
palms wrapped about his staff, he traversed the floor, poking the end of the staff against
the wool rug as if to punctuate each silent thought. He grunted twice and mumbled
something barely audible to the other two that watched him intently. With one last great
thud of his staff upon the floor, he again stood still. He leaned upon his staff and
addressed both men.
"There is no sense in us grieving over the interpreter's visions. We must take
assurance in the fact that the possibility of destroying the sphere still exists. How this
situation came about and what powers it might defy are no longer important to us. If our
destinies are in our own hands, then so be it. I will remain hopeful that the forces which
protect and enlighten us are still guiding our decisions. With that in mind I will turn to the
most important question which must be posed to the interpreter. Do you know the secrets
of Sanctum?"
Stephen spoke clearly and resolutely. "I know what the humans placed within their
tier. I don't know of what the other races placed."
Mappel's eyes lit up like a bonfire. His voice actually cracked with expectancy "That
is not important. The other races will be responsible for that. It is enough that you know
the secret of the tier which belonged to the humans. That is what I hoped for."
"Well, then your hope has been answered."
Matthew spoke with a more guarded tone, but his excitement and interest were equally
evident. "How did you come of this knowledge? I have never found anything in the book
of Godson. Was it hidden behind the words?"
Stephen shook his head resolutely. "No, the secret was never placed in the book. It
was too well guarded for that. The human followers of Godson wanted to spread the
word, but they didn't want to spread the secret. When copies of the book were made, the
secret of the tier was purposely left out. It was kept separate. It was kept on two pieces of
parchment and held by only two. When one of the holders passes on, the other goes out to
find another holder so there will always be two living humans with the secret. The two
holders must remain separate but they must always be aware of the other's health and
whereabouts. That's how the parchment continued to pass on through so many
generations. That's also how its existence faded from the memory of the humans."
"You are a holder," Mappel stated as more of a fact than a question.
"Yes, I am."
Mappel tapped his finger gently against his staff. He stood silent for but a moment,
both weighing his thoughts and the context of Stephen's words. When he spoke, his eyes
locked upon the face of the interpreter.
"Will you reveal to me the secret of the human tier?"
Stephen answered the elder elf's gaze with an icy determined stare of his own. His
position became as rigid and as solid as granite. His words were laced with strength. "I
can not do that, at least not now."
Mappel showed no sign of distress or disappointment. He continued to bear down
upon the interpreter, trying to press his own will upon him. "It is now that I need it. You
know what we all face. Hiding this secret will not help any of us. It could lead to our
death. It could doom the land itself."
"It could also doom the land if I reveal the secret at the wrong time. This is the wrong
time," Stephen answered back, giving no quarter.
"And what will be the right time? When it is too late?"
Stephen again shook his head deliberately. "I have no intention of holding to this
secret to such an extent."
The interpreter inspected the palms of his hands as he tried to further explain his
position. "You may think I am stubbornly holding to information without any true cause,
but that's not the case. I'll ask you to remember that what is written on the parchment is
only one piece of the puzzle. Sanctum is comprised of five tiers and five secrets. What I
know represents the secret of only one of those tiers." The interpreter looked towards
Mappel. "I assume you have the secret kept by the elves. That is another piece of the
puzzle. I'm not asking you to reveal that to me now. We have to wait, wait until the others
are here. We have to agree how to handle this together and how to reveal the secret so
that each race feels it has been dealt with fairly. Don't you think it might disturb the
dwarves if they find out that we have shared information about Sanctum before they have
arrived?"
Mappel nodded his head. "I doubt they would be happy, but there may be no need to
tell them of what was discussed in this chamber. It may ..."
Stephen did not let him finish. "No need to tell them the truth? That's not a good way
to start this thing out. It's better we tell everyone everything we know, and everything we
intend to do. We need everyone's cooperation. I will hold to what I know, and you will
hold to your secret. Otherwise we invite trouble before we even begin this thing."
It was Matthew who spoke up in as much defense of himself as for the interpreter. "It
is as I feared, the one with the responsibility of the secret has much to consider. Perhaps,
it will be a relief to us all when all the secrets of Sanctum are finally free."
"But they must be freed at the proper time," Stephen insisted. "I have seen, thus I
know, that at least one representative of each race will convene in this church. Would that
not be a better time to discuss what we all must face?"
"There is wisdom in what you say," Mappel conceded. "That, I can not deny, but I do
not like waiting, and there is little else for us to do."
"Not necessarily," Stephen said with a renewed twinkle in his eyes. The relaxed and
comforting smile returned to his lips as he again settled back into his chair. "I can explain
the revelations in detail as I have seen them regarding what we must do, what I have seen
happening and what I know is to come. With your knowledge of elflore we might put
together a plan before we know all the secrets."
"More wisdom," Mappel nodded appreciatively.
"Thank you," Stephen responded graciously. "I also have a question for you, which I
already believe I know the answer. You haven't found anyone from the delver race who
might know their secret, have you?"
Mappel spoke with a grunt of dissatisfaction. Of all the tiers, he believed the human
tier would be the most difficult to disclose. It was beyond him to believe that the human
secret would be so close at hand, while another would remain more elusive. "No, I
haven't. I sent word to the dwarves to send one with the knowledge of Sanctum. I gave
Ryson Acumen the same message to bring to the algors. But Ryson himself could give
me no insight as to who to inquire about the secret of the delver's tier."
"Then we have a problem to deal with as well. I don't know where to find that answer,
either. In fact, I wouldn't be surprised if the secret was lost. I hate to say things like that,
but we have to face the possibility. Where the humans had the church of Godson to
maintain the legends, the delvers had no church. In my dealings with them, I know they
are aware of the legends but they don't have any structured following that I know of.
Their race became splintered and eventually absorbed by the humans. It is difficult
enough these days to find a pure bred delver. This may mean their piece of the puzzle is
lost."
"If that is true, we may face a losing battle," Mappel said. "I had not truly thought of
the delver's tier until now. I had spoken briefly to Ryson of it. He had hoped that
Matthew might know of where to look."
Both Stephen and Mappel turned a hopeful gaze toward the reader, but Matthew's
expression curtailed any further enthusiasm.
"I didn't even know the human's secret of the tiers," he admitted with a sour grimace.
"How should I be expected to know of what the delvers put in Sanctum?"
"Maybe Ryson thought you would know of someone in Connel who might know?"
Stephen posed.
"He would know better than I. All I can suggest is asking other delvers. They mostly
spend time at the Night Watch Inn. But what am I supposed to do? Just go up to total
strangers, ask them if they are delvers and then ask them if they know of the secrets in
Sanctum Mountain? I don't think that would be wise."
"No, it would not," Mappel allowed. "But it is also unwise to ignore the issue. As
Stephen has stated, Sanctum is a puzzle of five pieces. We gain little if we obtain only
four."
"I wouldn't go that far," Stephen said optimistically. "If we manage to agree on a way
to reveal four of the secrets, that in itself is an accomplishment."
"Small accomplishments will mean little if they do not lead to ultimate victory,"
Mappel reminded the youthful interpreter as if to warn him of the price of failure. "This is
not something in which we can accept limited success. We succeed fully, or we perish."
"Maybe the best thing to do is wait until Ryson returns," Matthew advised. "He would
know the other delvers here in Connel. He would be the best to approach them."
"That's as good a plan as any," Stephen chimed.
"It delays things," Mappel replied sternly, "But I realize we have little other choice.
For now I would like to hear the details of your visions. I want to know what you see in
both of the alternative outcomes. There might indeed be something I might sense which
will lead us in the right direction."
Stephen crossed his hands in his lap and looked to Mappel with a true willingness to
express his revelations. His voice, however, turned somber and near hollow despair rung
from his words.
"I will tell you everything my mind has seen of both. I hope you can determine what
to do because I can tell you the scene I see if we fail is a terrible and frightening thing to
witness. We will all die slowly, withering away as the sphere turns our land into a sea of
dust."


Evan Chase, seasoned tracker, walked abruptly into Mayor Consprite's office. He did
not knock and no aide announced his arrival. The door swung open in total silence,
without a click of the latch, without a squeal of the knob, and without a creak of the
hinge. He stepped in like a hunting cat, and closed the door as quietly as it opened.
His eyes darted around the room but for a moment. In those passing seconds, he
analyzed, interpreted, and judged every item within the confines of those walls. Nothing
within his sight escaped his attention. He was aware of potential hazards as well as all
sharp edged or heavy items which were in reach of the mayor. He also made spatial
observations. He knew how far it was from the front of Consprite's desk to the door, he
noted the paths around furniture, and he observed that the window was locked.
He moved up to the mayor's desk, stepping so lightly he barely disturbed the dust
which came beneath the soles of his moccasins. His clothes moved with him as he
stepped. He wore no coat or cloak. Animal hides formed his shirt and pants. They did not
rustle or creak, but instead remained as silent as his own steps.
The mayor was aware of Chase's presence, only because he was waiting impatiently
for him, waiting and watching his door. If his attention had been upon papers on his desk,
Chase could have poked him on the forehead before he even knew the tracker was in the
room.
Chase acknowledged the mayor's gaze, but his eyes would not lock upon Consprite's
stare. The tracker shifted his eyes about warily. He seemed more concerned with the
movement and placement of the mayor's hands than his expression.
The tracker's own countenance was uncaring and shadowed by his own indifference
toward appearances. His face was shaven roughly. Spots of stubble remained upon his
chin and scattered about his throat - shaving with a hunting knife no matter how sharp
and without a mirror is bound to lead to a less than perfect job. The shaggy mop of black
hair on his head curled about in an unruly, unkempt mess. It covered both of his ears,
including the one which was missing a huge chunk from a fight with a wolf.
The wolf won that battle, forced Evan to run up a tree. His thigh still ached when it
rained from a savage bite received during that same encounter. He stayed away from
wolves and dogs ever since.
Chase minced no words as he stopped in front of the mayor's desk. "What do ya
want?"
The mayor scratched the tip of his nose before addressing the tracker. He also decided
to be blunt and to the point. "I need someone tracked and followed. I want to know where
he's been over the past two days and I want to know everything he does after you locate
him."
"Who?" The word came quick from the tracker's mouth as if he spit out the question.
It was quite evident that Evan Chase wasted little time, and knew too few words to waste
any of those.
Consprite grimaced. He did not like being questioned with such bluntness, but he was
well aware of his situation. As mayor, he had little that Chase wanted, and nothing he
needed. He could not threaten the tracker with ordinances, or the restriction of permits
and licenses. Chase probably used such papers to wipe his nose or light his smokes. The
mayor was not dealing with a merchant, or a homeowner, he was dealing with an
uncivilized barbarian that cared not at all for politics and power. Only gold enticed
trackers, and thus the mayor replied sourly to the blunt question. "Ryson Acumen, he's a
delver."
"I know who he is," Chase spoke as if insulted.
The mayor continued, undaunted by the tracker's lack of grace and tact. "Good, then
you'll know him when you find him. He left here several days ago to check out the
damage to other towns from the quake."
"An old trail," Evan stated quickly, making it clear he considered such a thing more
difficult and expected to be compensated for such.
Such a response was not lost on the mayor. It indicated the tracker was willing. If not,
he would have simply turned and walked out the door, perhaps spitting on the floor, or on
the mayor himself before leaving.
"I can help you with that to a degree," the mayor responded in fashion realizing the
negotiations for the fee had commenced. "I have reports from him as to where he went
and who he spoke to for the first part of his trip. I don't need you to look into that. He was
in Pinesway less than four days ago. It's where he went after that I want you to look into.
I can also give you leads into that. He was following the trail of the tremor. He also spent
some time in the Dark Spruce Forest."
Chase grimaced at the thought. Dark Spruce had little of anything that interested him
and a lot of what didn't, especially wolves. The job was becoming less enticing by the
moment. Again, he responded shortly.
"Dark Spruce is tough terrain. Nothing but trees clumped together."
"Very few trails as well," the mayor countered. "It's a good bet if you find any
markings, it will be our delver. Not many people have a desire to go through there. You
won't have to sort through multiple trails."
"Don't tell me how to do my job." The tracker sneered and for the first time his
expression revealed a hint of true inner feelings. He had an obvious dislike for delvers,
and had no mind to hide it. "I know about forests and I know about delvers, which brings
me to another point. Ryson Acumen is full bred. If he wants to, he can lose me at any
time. I can't explain it; it's just something about those full breeds. When they have a mind
for it, they don't leave a trace."
"He won't know you're tracking him. That is, if you're careful."
"I'll ignore that," Chase responded. "The fact of the matter is he's still a delver, and
that makes things harder."
The mayor waved his hand indifferently. "Fine, it makes it harder, but it's what you
do. Now do you want the job?"
If the tracker took time to consider the proposal, it was surely not long. Within mere
moments, he responded firmly, a tone that made it clear he had no intention of haggling.
"I'll take the job, but I want forty pieces of gold right now. Another ten when I get back,
thirty if I come across somethin' I don't like."
The demand caught the mayor off guard. He expected the tracker to begin bargaining
at half that amount. "That's absurd! He's only a delver. I've told you where he's headed
and where he's been!"
Evan Chase stood firm. He did, however, understand his price was exorbitant. He
made a simple explanation as to the height of his fee. "It's not what I'm tracking that's
botherin' me, it's the other things that might be out there."
"What are you talking about?" the mayor eyed him suspiciously. He wondered if the
tracker might know of the elves that accompanied Reader Matthew into his office that
morning. If he did, he would have Kendal's throat slit. The assistant was the only other
person that knew of the meeting.
Evan, however, made no reference to the elves, but he made it clear he knew
something was very different about Connel.
"I'm talking about what's been going on around here for the past few days," the tracker
said with a knowing expression. "And don't make it seem like ya don't know what I'm
talking about. I've seen ya traipsing out to places ya don't normally go. You've been out
to farms, and to the river. Ya normally don't do that, which means ya know something. I
don't know exactly what it is, but something ain't right. Which reminds me of another part
of my fee, I want to look over the reports on your desk right now."
"You can't see those!" Consprite objected strenuously. "That's official business. It has
nothing to do with you."
"Maybe it doesn't and maybe it does. I still want to see 'em." He could have snatched
them up without Consprite's permission, but he wanted the mayor to hand them over.
The mayor fought desperately to find a way to deny the request. Thoughts of these
reports spreading across Connel corrupted his thinking. He could only imagine the public
outcry for his head if the town found out what he had been hiding. He fished for a way
out. "Do you think you'll find out why I want the delver followed by reading these? I can
tell you that you won't. If you want to know that ..."
Chase interrupted the mayor's declarations forcibly. "I don't care about your reasons
for having this delver followed, but I do care about the things I might run into out there. I
know something's goin' on around here. I've seen tracks I can't identify. I've heard things
in the night that don't belong to any animal in these parts. Ya can keep your reasons to
yourself, but I want to know what's happening around here. It's a safe bet that if it's
happening here, it's happening out there in them woods."
The mayor grunted. He sat silent, contemplating other options, but Chase quickly took
them away.
"If you're thinking about finding another tracker, ya might as well forget it right now.
Any tracker worth his salt is going to want the same thing I want. I've been talking to
some of the others already. We know ya have an idea of what's out there. You can tell me
or you can tell someone else. The only tracker that'll go out there without reading your
blamed reports isn't gonna to come back. He'll take his up front money and leave."
Consprite snarled. "Fine." He picked up a clump of papers and held them out to
Chase. He had no alternative. He figured the tracker would probably find out for himself
sooner or later. His only hope was to bind the tracker to secrecy. "Here, read all you like,
but keep this to yourself. That's also part of the agreement."
Chase concentrated upon the papers in his hand. His lips moved sporadically as he
read. Reading words never helped him as much as reading the ground, so he never gave it
much practice. He knew barely enough to understand the new reality of things, and now
that he did, he cast a sideways glance at the mayor.
"This stuff for real?"
"Of course it's for real. I saw most of it myself."
Chase grimaced. "I don't like it. Corpses walking around and monsters comin' out of
the water. I don't like it at all."
The mayor held his hands up in exasperation. "Do you think I do?"
"No, I suppose you don't," Chase grunted. "What about the money?"
The mayor had already conceded to showing the tracker the reports, he would not
concede entirely as to the rest of the fee. "I'll pay you thirty now and fifteen when you get
back, whether you like what you find or not. That's more than this job is worth and you
know it."
Again, the tracker showed little sign of truly considering the agreement, and his
acceptance came nearly instantly. "It ain't worth my own skin, but I'll take it. It'll give me
a chance to find out what's really goin' on."
"Good." The mayor's voice turned cold as he gave his final instructions. "Now I don't
want you sending any reports to me. I want you to keep everything to yourself. You come
back when you know what the delver is up to and when you're sure you know where he's
been. Don't take too long either. If you think the delver is just surveying the land, then
forget him and come back here. You're also to report only to me. Is that clear?"
"Uh huh," Evan muttered as he gave one last glance to the papers before throwing
them back down on the mayor's desk.


"What do you think it is?" Holli asked as her head swerved about on her arched neck.
She did not like standing at the foot of this desert canyon wall. There was too much to
focus on at once, too many places where attackers could hide. Small openings in the
sandstone dotted the high rising edifice. A well placed archer could easily pick them both
off without either of them knowing from where the fatal arrows had been launched. Thick
ledges blocked her vision. Even now, warriors might be squatting low behind boulders,
using small cracks and crevices to keep a watchful eye for an opportunity to ambush.
The threat of danger washed her fatigue away with the strength of a waterfall. The
ache in her legs vanished, and she forgot her dry, sore throat which had become parched
from breathing the dry desert air. Her vision became sharp as she surveyed all that stood
before her.
Holli made no secret of her discomfort over approaching the sandstone mountain, but
the delver had persisted and brought them to within arm’s reach of its very base. Her
hand gripped the hilt of the Sword of Decree. A glistening light appeared just above the
sheath for she had pulled the sword slightly from its cover, revealing a sliver of the blade.
Ryson, at first, paid her no mind. His body remained still. His head bent backward to
allow him an upward glance at the face of the canyon wall. Rather than turning his head,
he simply moved his eyes, from one small opening to another. He pulled his spyscope
one last time from his pouch. He scanned several different openings and grunted in
satisfaction. After pocketing the scope, he finally answered the elf's question.
"I believe it's a meeting place for them of some sort. It may also be a type of village
for them to live, but I doubt any of them live here for long periods of time. From what
I've seen and what Mappel told me, they spend almost the same amount of time alone as
they do together."
"Are they in there now?" Holli demanded with a tone which made it clear she wished
to know exactly what dangers they faced.
Ryson turned to her for the first time since they arrived at the foot of the wall, and he
saw her hand upon the hilt of the sword. Her threatening stance alarmed him nearly to the
point of anger. "Yes, they're there and don't even think about pulling that thing out. In
fact, I want you to take your hand away from it right now."
Holli scowled at the delver. "It's my job to protect you." She spoke as if it were a rule
never meant to be broken.
"It's also your job to see that my mission succeeds," Ryson shot back. "That means I
have to meet with these algors. You're going to make that impossible if you continue to
maintain that threatening position."
Holli's glare darted from the sandstone mountain to the face of the delver. "It is not a
threatening position. It's a position of defense."
Ryson shook his head. "I don't care what it is. I want you to stop."
"You would have me leave us vulnerable?" Holli posed the question with as much
disbelief as annoyance.
"I will have you let me complete what we were set out to do," Ryson stated abruptly.
He bit his lip before continuing. With a heavy breath, he cleared his growing irritation.
He renewed his request with a note of greater understanding, but with no less conviction.
"Look, I know you're only doing this to keep me safe, but we can't have that right now.
The algors are here, and they know we're here. They're not going to see us if they think
you're going to lop their heads off."
Holli did not argue further. She removed her gaze from the delver and again returned
to surveying the many openings in the cliffs. Her hand moved slowly away from the
sword handle. It became a taut fist as it dropped to her side.
Ryson began pacing about the desert floor as he inspected the lower level of the
sandstone wall. He knelt down at a few places and rubbed his hand against the rough,
porous rock.
Holli virtually ignored him, and for the first time since their trip began, she allowed
him to move about without following close behind. She kept a steady breath and a
watchful eye, but she knew in her current position she was defenseless, an easy target for
a myriad of attacks. She accepted the role with the same stubborn determination which
moved her full speed through the desert. If she was to be sacrificed for the success of her
mission, that was merely the distinction of her duty.
Ryson continued examining the rock wall. He would stand and brush the sand from
his knees, only to take a few steps and kneel again. "I don't think they built this thing
themselves," he muttered. "I think the wind and perhaps a long extinct river shaped it
originally, but they sure made enough adaptations. I wouldn't be surprised if those
openings led to a completely intertwined tunnel system, except for maybe a few of the
lower ones. They're decoys. I doubt they go anywhere accept to dead ends. But they're
definitely traps for possible invaders." He pointed to three openings which were closest to
the ground, only three or four body lengths above the desert floor. "You see those three?
If we went into any of those we wouldn't come out. They're all set to collapse. I guess the
algors figured if invaders tried to climb up, they would investigate the first openings they
came across. If they did, they'd never get a chance to climb any higher. Not that climbing
it would be easy, not without the right tools anyway. Although, it looks like they've made
some false facings that seem sturdy, but probably wouldn't hold any weight."
Ryson again stood erect and brushed his knees, then his hands. Loose grains of sand
showered back to the ground before he walked placidly back to Holli's side.
"I don't think climbing is an option," Ryson said as he shook his head. "No, it's a safer
bet if we stay here and wait for them to come out. That'll probably also let them feel
better about us. We won't be forcing ourselves on them. I suggest we simply make camp
here and hope they come out to see us."
Holli scanned the area. Overall, the plan held merit. The towering sandstone wall
provided shade from the afternoon sun. It appeared the desert vegetation also approved of
the cooler, albeit shadier ground. Groups of cacti and brush arose from the sand with
greater numbers along this section of desert. Ryson had previously proven his skill in
finding pockets of underground water, and she believed he would have no difficulty here.
The canyon side also would prove to grant protection from hot southwesterly winds. In
the refuge of the sandstone, the sand was not as dry and loose as in the open desert. It did
not burn to the touch or grate with the same abrasiveness as the sand they just recently
walked across. Indeed, this area held many advantages for a camp site, yet she looked to
the openings far overhead with a weary eye.
"I do not like making a camp so close to this wall," she said firmly. "We are almost
inviting an ambush. They could attack us at anytime from anywhere."
Ryson arched his neck as he directed his gaze across the face of the rock canyon.
"That's very true, and I'm sure that bothers you. I just don't think we have any choice."
"There are always choices."
"That's also true, but none of the other choices will give us as much of a chance to
convince the algors that we're here to see them and that we're not just a couple of lunatics
out for a stroll in the desert."
"They may think that no matter what we do. And if that is the case, it may be more
reason for us to consider our security."
"Let me ask you this, have you heard of the algors attacking any one of your people?"
He paused to allow her to answer, but she remained silent. He continued, explaining his
own difficulties of what they faced. "You see, I really don't know what to expect. I have
no experience with algors. I'm basing all of my decisions on what Mappel has told me
and from what I see in the desert."
"I have no experience with the algors, either," Holli admitted frankly. "The race
avoids all contact with others. The elves have no cause to venture into the desert and the
algors apparently care little for the forests. I can't say that I have ever heard of the algors
attacking an elf, but I have also never heard of an elf seeking them out in their desert
home."
"So you think it’s wiser to keep a safe distance from them?"
Holli simply nodded.
Ryson crossed his hands in front of him. He tapped his thumbs together methodically,
in rhythm with his thoughts. Algors; a race akin to the lizards, forming communities, yet
living solitary lifestyles in the vast reaches of the desert. He knew so little about them.
Mappel said they spoke in the same language. That in itself was difficult to imagine,
large upright lizards holding a conversation. The image was laughable.
Yet, was that not the point of his mission? As absurd as it seemed, his main goal was
to meet and talk with the algors, to convince them of the danger to the land and all of its
inhabitants. Here he was, already in the desert, already following the thin veneer of signs
that led him to this canyon.
In the end, he returned to the very things which brought him to this place. He turned to
his inner most feelings. He hoped his own deepest instincts would guide him to a
decision, just as they guided him through the desert. If he expected to meet with the
algors to explain the breach in Sanctum and the threat of the sphere, he would have to
gain their trust. With that thought, he gained the answer to his question. They would wait
here in the open, wait for the algors to acknowledge them. How could he expect them to
trust him, if he did not trust them first?
He made his decision known to Holli by yelling out to the canyon wall and the many
openings within it.
"Algors! My name is Ryson Acumen. I'm a delver. I am with Holli Brances, an elf.
We are here to speak with you."
His words echoed only slightly overhead against the cliff face. After that, the hot
desert air swept them away. No other sound graced the area until Ryson continued.
"All the races must speak together! The Sphere of Ingar is free from Sanctum! We can
tell you what we know, but we must meet with you."
He lowered his head, and his voice, as he turned his attention to Holli. "Let's make
camp here. We have to show them that we trust them. I really don't think they'll attack us
anyway. They'll either come down, or they'll ignore us. We'll just have to wait and see."
"We will not have to wait at all," Holli stated abruptly. Her face was expressionless,
the demeanor of an elf guard facing the unknown. Her eyes narrowed as they scanned the
entirety of the canyon wall. While she fought off her own instincts to pull her sword, she
nodded to Ryson to look back.
Ryson caught his breath as he turned. In all of his experiences over the past few days,
nothing could prepare him for this bizarre spectacle. Meeting an elf was one thing, this
sight yanked at his grip on sanity. Even seeing the ghost of Shayed could not compare to
what he now witnessed.
Like a legion of ants flowing from their anthill, countless algors erupted from the
openings which abounded across the sandstone. Within mere moments, nearly every cave
entrance spat out algors. An endless flow of yellowish green flowed down the canyon
wall toward them. They climbed downward with casual ease, each algor moving in
concert with the next, so as every apparent space of the cliff face was covered.
At first it was difficult for the delver to center his attention upon a single algor. Their
coordinated movements kept Ryson scanning the growing flock as a single entity. Like a
shifting, diving, turning school of fish, the moving multitude attracted attention from
every angle and direction. Not one algor moved in opposition, not one algor stalled or
paused. Step by step, foothold by foothold, lines of algors moved as if directed by a
single consciousness. It was like watching a parade of well trained soldiers, soldiers that
spent years together so that every movement was in precise order.
The delver and the elf marveled at the whole spectacle. Never had either witnessed
such a display. Even the elf guard could not boast of such precise coordination of
movement. It seemed impossible, as if the desert had finally taken control of their minds.
It was not until the algors began their final approach towards them, that they were able to
break free from the hold of the group movement.
As the first wave of algors reached the desert floor and stepped toward him, Ryson
gasped out the breath he had held. He inspected their physical characteristics with as
much wonder as he watched their movements. An upright toad, as tall as he was, was the
only way he could describe them. Large black eyes bulged near the top of every head.
Two holes formed nostrils at the end of the rounded snouts that jutted forward. The
mouth opening crested wide, far back to the round greenish brown cheeks. Not much of a
forehead existed, merely a space above and between the two eyes. The top of their heads
curved slightly before dropping down to a wide neck. Small purple bumps took the place
of hair.
As for their bodies, the algors wore no cloak to hide their scaly chest which was more
yellow than green. Long thin arms hung nimbly from somewhat droopy shoulders. Long
narrow legs, which appeared quite flexible, held the light weight of the algor easily.
Claws tipped the thin fingers and toes and webbing filled the spaces between each. Just as
the legends described, there was no sign of a tail.
More and more of the algors filed down the sandstone mountain and encircled the two
messengers. They left a small space around Ryson and Holli as they formed an unbroken
circle all the way around, but they left little room for themselves. They clumped
themselves together in a growing, continuous ring, hardly leaving enough room to
breathe. Arms appeared interlocked as they stood hip to hip and shoulder to shoulder. The
chests of those that stood behind the inner ring pressed flat against the backs of those in
front of them, and so it was for each ring which spread back from the inner point of
Ryson and Holli.
It was all the elf could do to remain calm, to stand as if oblivious to the swarming
presence. She bit back urge after urge to draw her sword and maintain a defensive
position. It was not so much the sight of the algors which disturbed her, it was the simple
fact that they were now completely surrounded. Not a single path existed for their escape.
She tried to steady herself, and maintain a casual appearance as if the circling horde did
not incite her. She hoped to maintain a single perspective as if to declare that she cared
little for what was happening around her. All such attempts, however, were futile. Her
head continued to shift from side to side as she kept a constant gauge on the space
between them and each and every algor. She could not break from her training any more
than she could stop breathing.
Ryson dealt with the circling mass with even less success. Such proximity to such
foreign creatures stirred strange feelings. In his lifetime, he spent many a day seeking
new and exotic places. It was part of his nature, part of his calling. He found nothing
more exciting than coming across an unknown valley in the mountains or a secret cove
on a deserted shore line. He thrilled at the first sight of large and small animals, anything
that was new to him and the more foreign, the more bizarre, and the greater the thrill.
At this moment, however, he did not feel such unbounded excitement. Certainly,
nothing could be more exotic than what stood before him now, yet, he actually recoiled
from the sight of such unfamiliar creatures. It was one thing to be a delver on exploration;
it was something else all together to break the very bonds of reality. Such was the case
with a toad-faced creature that took the posture of an ordinary man.
The astonishing demeanor of the algor was not all that unnerved him. Their cresting
numbers, which threatened to swallow every inch of space around him, left the delver
searching in vain for open spaces. Just like his elf companion, he tossed his head from
side to side with anxious rigor. He searched in vain for open spaces within the cascade of
algors, searched for an open path, or even jagged breaks in their ranks, but none existed.
He felt as if the rings of algors would suffocate him.
Again, his anxiety was unfamiliar. He spent many a day exploring tight caves and
narrow caverns, spaces with barely enough room to move, and he never flinched. On
countless occasions, he walked through forests so tightly bound with trees and
underbrush that nearly all light vanished, even during the summit of the sun. Such
excursions gave him no more apprehension then walking into the Night Watch Inn. Yet,
this throng of algors left him more than uneasy. Claustrophobia chewed at his nerve
endings and left him fighting for air.
Ryson could not speak. He stood helpless as a seemingly infinite number of bulging
black eyes probed him. Suddenly, his claustrophobia, his aversion toward their
strangeness, as well as the desert silence were all broken by a chorus which erupted from
every angle of the ring of algors.
"What do you know of the orb?"
The request came from several dozen mouths at once, but they were in such unison
that the words were clear.
Ryson flinched in surprise but said nothing. He understood the question, for the algors
spoke as plainly as any human. He might have expected a slithering accent or croaking,
throaty tone, but neither manifested itself.
The algors stood waiting for a reply, motionless for but a moment. Their own response
to the delver's silence crackled and rippled throughout their own circles, a cacophony of
questions and exclamations. Gone was the unity of their voice. The harmony of the first
question which rang with such clarity was now replaced by a confused, muddled barrage.
Each algor spoke a different message and each called out to be heard. Neither Ryson nor
Holli could discern a single question or statement from the confused mass of voices.
The ruckus stopped as suddenly as it began just as a hundred or more algors spoke out
again in unison. "Why don't you answer?"
The sudden shift from the undecipherable, disjointed outburst to this harmonic
question left a strange echo in the air. Like a voice of reason breaking from the bounds of
confusion, it prodded the delver into a reply.
"I didn't expect to see so many of you," he explained in a raspy, uncertain voice.
A checked gurgle of laughter broke from the mass, but was quickly stifled.
Ryson felt an immediate urge to explain further. "I mean, I knew there were a lot of
you up there, I just didn't expect you all to come down at once."
Several questions broke from the crowd. Not all the algors spoke, so it was not like the
first unintelligible outburst, but no question was the same. Ryson struggled to hear as
many as possible.
"How did you find us?"
"What of the orb?"
"Who is responsible?"
These were the only questions he could make out. The others broke off into a cluttered
echo of shouts.
Ryson took a deep breath. He took a quick glimpse at the ground to organize his
thoughts. When he lifted his head and spoke, he tried to look at as many of them as
possible at once, hoping they would understand he was addressing them all. He raised his
voice to be heard, but kept it under a shout.
"The sphere is no longer contained in Sanctum," he started with emphasis, hoping they
would not interrupt with another outburst. "It is still within the mountain, but it has used
its power to create a breach in the wall. The magic which was buried with it is now being
discharged throughout the land. Unfortunately, the magic still contains the poison which
forced its burial in the first place. I have met with elves to discuss this. I am here as a
messenger to ask you to come to Connel."
More questions erupted from the crowd. Again, Ryson strained to hear them all.
"How do we know it's true?"
"What of the foul creatures?
"How did the breach occur?"
Ryson held up his hand as the questions mounted. He could no longer decipher the
words from even the closest algor. Their voices melded together into a rumbling chant of
nonsensical syllables.
Slowly, reluctantly, the algors quieted.
Ryson spoke with as much patient composure as possible. "The sphere has gained an
awareness of its own burial and has broken free with its own power. The return of the
magic has brought with it the return of dark creatures. Goblins have returned to Uton. As
for knowing it’s true, our very presence here should indicate there is something of great
importance happening throughout the land."
Several algors in the rear shouted out together. "Do not believe him."
Ryson responded quickly. "Whether you believe me or not should not matter. The
simple fact is that the magic is again free in the land. If you haven't noticed it yet, just
wait. You will. There are signs of it occurring all around this desert of yours. I have
already encountered the walking dead and a group of goblins. But like I said, you don't
have to believe me. You'll see sooner or later. The point is that the sphere is free from
Sanctum and it threatens us all."
"How does it threaten us?" A question broke clear from the crowd. It was again
spoken by several algors, and again in unison.
"It contains a poison which will kill all of the races, kill every living thing in the land."
"The poison is directed at the elves," the chorus of voices replied.
Ryson shot a questioning glance at the mob. "Then you admit that you know the
magic has returned?"
"We have known that for some time," spoke one voice from the back of the crowd.
"We have been able to return to the ancient art of healing," another single algor spoke
from Ryson's right.
The algors continued to make statements, but they called them out one by one rather
than all at once. Each algor was allowed to speak, if it so wanted, and now the others
allowed each statement to be called out without interruption.
"The magic may not be pure, but we can still use it."
"It contains nothing which can hurt us."
"None of this concerns us."
It was this last statement that raised the ire of the delver. For the first time he raised
his voice with more than a hint of anger. "So that's it? It doesn't concern you so you'll
just hide out here in the desert? What are you going to do when the sphere finally turns
toward you? What will you say when the poison starts affecting the algors? Will it
concern you then? And what about the goblins, the undead and other creatures mutated
by the tainted magic? When they start attacking you, will you simply tell them that none
of this concerns you? Do you think they'll listen? I could have said the same thing when
all of this happened. I'm not an elf. I'm a delver. But I realize we all have a stake in this."
Ryson's harangue was suddenly stopped in surprise as he felt a hand upon his
shoulder. His head swung with deliberation. It was Holli's hand that held him, and it was
Holli that spoke with gentle wisdom. "This will not help. Convincing them of the need
for assistance is not the same as scolding them. We need their help."
Ryson bit his lip. He unclenched his tightly held fists and folded his hands together in
front of him. Turning his attention back to the algors, he spoke with greater control. He
did not, however, apologize for his outburst.
"If you know that the sphere is no longer contained, then you must accept that there is
danger to the land. It is your own responsibility to determine what that danger is. You
owe it to every one of your kind. I'm not asking you to do anything more than send
representatives with me to meet at the town of Connel. Other races will be there. As you
can see now, a delver is walking with an elf. I have been told the dwarves will also be
present. Will it really help you if you miss this meeting? Or is it better that you
understand what is happening? There you can discuss the merits of your own opinions
and determine for yourselves if you are really threatened."
Before continuing further, Ryson recalled Mappel's insight about the algors. Algors
were attracted to the unusual. The stranger the story the more likely the algor will
embrace it. Ryson brought the most curious of the events back into his memory. It was
not a difficult task. He spouted them off to the crowd with a dramatic flare.
"Maybe you are willing to wait this out in the desert, but are you truly aware of all
that's happening around you? I have spoken to the ghost of Shayed. That's right, the elf
sorceress that brought the races together in the Wizard War. She has returned and now
waits for us at the summit of Sanctum. She waits for all the races. If you doubt any of
this, remember that the magic has returned to the land. It allows the spirits to return just
as it allows the goblins, just as it allows you to work with powers of healing. The land is
changing. That much you can't deny. I suggest you find out just how much things have
changed. Otherwise, the algors will be ignored in the meeting of the races, just as you
will have decided to ignore my request."
Barely a moment of silence existed in the small gap between the end of Ryson's
speech and the eruption of the algors. Voices rang out from the crowd. Some spoke in
unison, others broke from the tide.
"It would not hurt to find out what is really happening."
"If Shayed has returned, we must be included."
"What if the sphere falls in the wrong hands?"
"Send out scouts."
"If there is a danger we should be prepared."
"We should not be left out of something so important."
Ryson seized the trend of agreement towards his purpose. "Then you must send some
of your own with me now. Holli and I will guide you to Connel. We will see that you are
told of everything we know. You will have your say in this matter. If you don't, decisions
will be made without your consent. Can you afford such a thing when dealing with the
Sphere of Ingar?"
A throng of fifty or more voices spoke in somber unison. While the chorus rang with
clarity, its tone of anguish could not be denied. "No, we can not."
A single voice spoke out immediately after to throw one last dilemma at the delver.
"Connel is a human town. We can not go there."
Holli took the reins of the discussion for the first time and settled the matter quickly.
"We will bring you to my camp first. My people will see that you are brought into
Connel unnoticed and protected. We will see that the humans do not harm you."
"Then it's settled," Ryson accented the point. "All you have to do is decide which of
you will accompany us."
For the first time since crowding around Ryson and Holli, the algors turned their
attention towards themselves. Heads bobbed about. Calls were shouted to and fro. The
rumble of disconcerted voices turned into a roar. Every algor spoke at once, every algor
shouted something different. None listened to what the next said.
The mass began to move again, but not in unison, not like the tightly defined group
that brought them down from the canyon wall. Instead, algors moved independently and
in every direction. They pressed passed the right and left of one another. They circled
clockwise and counter clockwise. Some pushed to the forefront of the circle. Others left
completely, returning to the holes high in the sandstone cliff face.
Ryson could not imagine a more confused sight. Like dry leaves scattered by the four
winds, the algors mulled about without purpose or direction. If the delver hoped to gain
any group consensus, such hope faded in this churning mass.
He rubbed his forehead with his hand, unsure of what to say or do next. At this point,
he doubted he would have been heard even if he shouted. Algor after algor continued to
step past, each mumbling or shouting something to a crowd that could not hear and did
not wish to listen.
"This is ridiculous," Ryson mumbled to Holli. "I don't think we have time for this. Do
you have any suggestions?"
Holli simply shook her head.
Ryson heaved a heavy, exasperated breath. He watched another group of algors vanish
into the sandstone. He wondered if they would return, he wondered if it mattered. They
were still encircled by hundreds of algors.
As he turned about to gauge the actual numbers that remained, he noticed many
walking off into the desert by themselves. They walked without care, off into the barren
desert as if it were nothing more than a casual walk in a small park. Those that left in this
manner, left alone. They drifted off in separate directions, in every direction; north, south,
east and west. Some rounded the wall of the sandstone canyon, others walked off toward
the high dunes of the southeast. One after another they disappeared into the bright sand
which continued to reflect the late afternoon sun.
As algors continued to leave into the sandstone caves or out into the vastness of the
open desert, the numbers of algors which remained about Ryson and Holli dwindled.
Soon, there was but fifty. They continued to speak out their minds as they moved about
without form or pattern. The roar had also diminished. Now, their calls mounted to
nothing more than a rumble. Still, Ryson could not make out any of what they said.
Suddenly, they stopped. They stopped talking. They reformed a tight circle about
Ryson and Holli and stopped moving. Roughly twenty of the fifty voices called out to
together.
"It is decided, we will accompany you."
Ryson could not mask his surprise. "All of you? There's about fifty."
"We are the most interested," the voices again rang out in unison. "The others have
left it to us."
Joy over having the algors accept his plea mixed with apprehension over leading fifty
back through the desert, to Holli's camp, and ultimately into Connel. "I don't know if it's a
good idea to bring so many," Ryson stammered.
"Why?" the chorus questioned.
"It will attract too much attention," Ryson responded. "And it will be dangerous. How
am I going to keep you together when we get to Dark Spruce Forest? What if we're
attacked by goblins? For that matter, how am I going to conceal a group of fifty algors
walking into Connel?"
The unity of the algors again disintegrated. One by one shouts disseminated from the
smaller circle.
"If one goes, we all go."
"It will be more dangerous."
"A smaller group can travel faster."
"Who is to choose who goes?"
"Let the delver choose."
Ryson responded quickly to the last remark.
"You can't leave that to me," he insisted. "I'm not the one that should make that
decision. We need algors that can speak for all of you. How do I know that? We also
need algors that know the legend and the secrets of Sanctum."
"Any algor which stands before you can fulfill that task," the group again spoke in
unity. "What one knows, we all know. We keep no secrets from each other."
"Then it doesn't matter which of you go. I shouldn't have to choose at all. You can
decide," Ryson offered hopefully.
"How many do you suggest accompany you?"
"How about four?" Ryson speculated.
"No less than ten," the group responded. "But you must choose."
Ryson again looked to Holli for assistance, but got nothing more than a shrug.
Again he addressed the fifty. "Are you sure about this?"
"You must choose."
Ryson accepted the responsibility with great reluctance, but accept it he did.
Randomly, he began tapping the shoulders of algors around him. He counted out numbers
as he moved about the circle. When he reached ten, he returned to the center.
"If I touched your shoulder, you will come with us."
Without any dissent and without making a sound, the forty not chosen removed
themselves from the circle. Some went off into the desert, some returned to the sandstone
wall.
The ten moved in closer to the delver and elf. All ten spoke together. "You will lead
us now to the elf camp."
Ryson held up his hand. "I don't want to head off just like that. We've had a long
journey to get here and it's going to be a long walk back. It's late and the sun will set
soon. For now, I would hope you would offer us a place to camp. The time of rest will be
well spent."
Holli said nothing, but her expression revealed her relief.
"We can stay the night within the canyon," the algors replied. "But we will leave
before dawn."
"Agreed," Ryson stated. "Keep in mind, this is going to be a long and potentially
dangerous journey. Do you have any weapons to bring with you?"
"We will bring our slings." It was all they said before they turned and stepped up to
the wall of the canyon.
Ryson and Holli looked at each other before following the small group up a short
climb and into a hole in the sandstone mountain.


Ryson glanced over his shoulder for the third time in a span of but twenty paces. He
said nothing to the others, but he noticed Holli making similar checks. They had left the
loose sand and the dry wind behind them, but he doubted it was the fading sight of the
desert which called to her.
He knew she was happy to be upon solid footing, away from the shifting sands and the
bone scorching heat. A few stubborn trees sprung up from the rock hard ground. He knew
that sight brought her solace. Even now, larger clusters of trees poked above the horizon
in the direction they traveled. Before the sun dropped from its peak in the sky, they would
be within sight of Dark Spruce Forest.
He knew she was well aware of this, yet her attention clearly focused on their flanks
and not upon the path ahead. Her weary glances to their rear far surpassed her normal
cautiousness. Her darting eyes continued to scan the land in every direction, but he could
not deny that her sweeping glances to the southwest were more deliberate. He could also
not deny that her apparent concern simply matched his own.
Perhaps she spotted something, or heard something; Ryson could not tell. He had not
seen or heard anything as of yet, but he, too, was well aware of something which
followed them. He believed it picked up their trail just as the sandy terrain gave way to
the rocks of these canyons and hills which separated the forest from the desert. Whatever
it was, it was keeping out of sight and paying careful attention to the wind. Only during
sudden shifts, caused by breaks in the rocky hills, did Ryson pick up an unfamiliar scent.
It disappeared quickly, as if that which pursued them noticed the change and adjusted its
position to compensate.
He did not recognize the scent, for it was totally unfamiliar. Frustration loomed as his
ever observant senses failed to identify the threat. He knew it had little to do with the
algors that accompanied him. He had spent many hours resting and traveling with the ten
that now walked at his side. In that time, he grew accustomed to them, etched an
understanding of their appearance, their sounds, and their scents into his mind. Whatever
followed was surely far removed from the race of algors.
But there was also something else which nagged at the delver - a second threat;
something that moved behind the first pursuer. He could almost sense a third party;
someone or something which remained far in the distance. He was not totally sure, no
true signs he could point to, only a penetrating sensation that a second pair of eyes
followed them as well.
He wondered if it was nothing more than nerves, overcompensation for dealing with
the magic. Or it might have been the magic itself; some strange spell that drifted in the air
and confused his senses.
Even as he considered this explanation, he could not accept it. The feeling of being
watched, of being followed; this was a sensation he experienced before, before the magic
tumbled back into the land. It was a feeling his mother and father told him to trust, a
feeling which was part of being a delver.
He would not doubt his instincts. Such an act would be more than foolish. He now
accepted the fact that they were being followed not by just one, but by two separate
individuals or groups.
With acceptance came the need for a solution. If they were being followed, it
represented a threat and endangered his mission. If he was to succeed, he must identify
these threats, and ultimately remove them.
He considered the facts. The closest pursuer was acting more like a hunter; moving
with stealth, but taking risks to close the gap. Its intentions were obviously far more
ruthless than that of the second entity. Ryson wondered if even Holli was aware of the
second follower. He doubted it, for it was only a deep sensation within himself which
alerted him to that presence. Thus, his mind set upon the nearest hazard.
Ryson turned his attention to their own trail and looked upon the ground they passed
over. He, himself, left no mark upon the ground. The elf guard also left no sign, but the
clawed toes of the algors made unmistakable scratches in the rocks, scratches which
indicated their movements as clearly as if they tied balloons to their path.
Ryson faced the simple truth that anyone, even the most novice tracker, could follow
them while staying out of sight. If he hoped to force the pursuer out into the open, he
would have to put an end to such markings.
Hiding such a trail would not be impossible, but he would have to have the assistance
of the algors. They would have to walk carefully, upon the heels of their feet with their
toes upward. He wondered if they would acquiesce to such a request, and if so, how
much it would slow their progress. As he contemplated their willingness to agree to such
a demand, he considered if they even cared about what dangers they faced.
The algors, with their small cactus skin sacks draped over their shoulders, paid little
mind to the backward glances of both the delver and the elf. They walked onward at the
direction of both Ryson and Holli with their faces and eyes forward, oblivious to
everything behind them.
Unable to make a firm decision and desiring greater information, the delver solicited
advice. Ryson caught Holli's attention as she made yet another backwards glance over her
shoulder. He pointed with his thumb off into the distance behind them and nodded his
head.
Holli returned the nod.
"I want to talk with you," Ryson whispered. He then heaved a heavy breath and called
for the attention of the algors.
The algors stopped and turned about. They tilted their heads as the delver walked
within whispering distance.
"Keep your attention on me," the delver said softly but with a hard edge. "And don't
show any concern." Actually, he didn't know if the algors could reveal anything other
than confusion. Their expressions always seemed the same, but he remembered how they
walked about in a jumbled mass when they debated some question. For now, he wanted
them to stay put. "I want you to act as if I've asked you to take a short break for rest and
food. I want you to take a seat over there, on that small group of rocks. Take some food
from your bags. Keep your slings handy, but out of sight. Something is following us. I
don't know what it is ..."
Before he could continue, the algors shuffled off casually to the rocks as Ryson
directed. They gathered about as if nothing at all was wrong and appeared to aimlessly
remove food from their bags. Roughly half of them, however, draped their slings over the
sides of their pouches. Those that did not pull out their slings discreetly kicked and
nudged fist-sized rocks within reach.
Ryson marveled at the algors actions. They did not require long explanations. They
followed his instructions implicitly, and they showed not the slightest sign of panic. If the
delver himself was watching from a distance, he would never have believed the algors
were informed of any danger.
More than satisfied with these results, he motioned for Holli to follow him over to a
small tree. He picked a small nut from a lower branch and broke it open. He offered it to
the elf as he picked another. He spoke with his attention on the tree.
"I guess we both know we're being followed. Have you seen anything?"
Holli spoke coolly, as if a well trained subordinate making a report to an officer.
"Yes, it fell into sight only once. It was crouched down and appeared like only another
boulder, but I make mental notes of the positions of all large rocks to gauge the distance
we travel. We passed no such boulder. I turned my head and allowed sufficient time for it
to move. When I checked again, the boulder was gone. I have not seen it since. I can not
tell you with any great accuracy where it is right now or if it continues to follow us."
"It's still following us," Ryson assured. "What do you think it is?"
"I can only believe it is a mountain shag. It was too far away for me to see any detail,
but based on its crouch and the space it filled, its overall height would exceed two
average elves."
"That big? Could it be anything else?"
"It could be anything. With the magic as it is, it could be another mutation. But I
sincerely believe that it is a mountain shag."
"Well, I put great trust in your assumptions." The mention of a mountain shag brought
little solace to the delver. While it revealed what followed them, it did little to tell him
more. He dug into his own memory of the legends, but found little to draw upon. He
needed to know more about what true hazards the shag presented, and he pressed the elf
for more information. "Besides being tall what else can you tell me about it?"
"It is strong, but only marginally quick. While it has speed, I doubt it could match
yours or mine. We can outrun it if necessary."
"Even with the algors?"
Holli shook her head. "Doubtful."
"Then, that's not an option. What else?"
"It is heavy. It can climb rocks like a mountain goat, but it needs solid ground to
support its weight. If we make it to the forest, even with the algors, we can escape. It
would not be able to climb or move through the trees as we would. It would eventually
lose our trail as it blunders through the forest, forced to break the branches which block
its path. Shags are, however, somewhat intelligent. I am sure it knows the forest looms
ahead of us. If it wishes to attack, it will do so before it loses the advantage of the terrain.
It will probably wait until we reach the taller hills and attack from above. It will then use
its weight and strength to drop down on us and take out as many as possible. If we try and
beat it to the higher ground, it will trap us by circling the foot of any hill we choose to
climb. It will then simply outwait us."
Realizing that outrunning the shag would be futile, Ryson turned over the option of a
forward attack. "The algors have their slings ready, and you have your bow. If I lure it
into the open, you can send a barrage upon it. Maybe it will be enough to scare it away.
Do you think we can overpower it with our weapons?"
While Holli's face remained expressionless, her tone revealed her skepticism. "The
slings will do little. Blunt weapons, even when projected with a sling will do little to hurt
a mountain shag. The matted hair and thick skin give it protection. The best weapon
against it is the bow with long tipped arrows. We have but one bow and the shag has a
high tolerance to pain. I can aim for the eyes, but I don't know if that will stop it. The first
may only anger it, and that is as risky as trying to outrun it."
"What about your sword?"
"A sword can be effective, but it's a dangerous ploy. If you're close enough to use the
blade of a sword, you're within the grasp of its long arms."
Ryson turned his head and scanned the entire horizon. He also took in a quick glimpse
of the sky. It remained clear with no signs of storms. The temperature was still very
warm, attributable to the southerly winds which blew off of the desert.
Ryson eyed the algors. "I didn't tell them what was following us. Do you think they
know?"
"They have showed no sign of alarm."
"Do algors even know what a mountain shag is?" Ryson wondered openly.
"Who is to say for sure, but I would guess so. They have already said that they share
no secrets from one another, that what one knows they all know. I don't know how much
knowledge they retain of the legends, but they knew of Sanctum and the sphere."
"I agree," Ryson affirmed as he removed his gaze from the algors. He hoped not to
alarm them further, though they sat and ate as if it were an ordinary meal, as if they were
still within the reaches of their desert home.
Ryson began picking once more at the branches for scattered nuts. He offered a
handful to the elf. "What about the algors in a hand to hand fight against a shag? They
seem to have sharp claws. And there are ten of them. If they group together, they could
be a dangerous weapon themselves."
"I have heard ancient stories of mountain shags," Holli began with a distressing tone.
"Powered in some way by the magic which filled the air, a single shag attacked entire elf
camps, dodging arrows and carrying away as many as a half dozen at a time. These tales
make me believe that the shag is not concerned with our numbers. As for the algors
combat abilities, I can not say. They carry a sling. That makes me believe they prefer
fighting at a distance. I'm sure they would use their claws if that were their last option,
but I wouldn't count on their effectiveness."
Ryson put a hand to his chin as he considered their predicament with growing dismay.
"Then, we're really not facing a very positive situation here. If this thing wants us, it's
going to take us in the hills ahead, and unless we get lucky, we don't have much else to
do about it. We have to proceed, but we'd simply be walking right where it wants us. And
I don't want to hang around here for night to fall."
"No, that would be disastrous," Holli emphasized.
"What are our true options?"
Holli did not hesitate in replying. She had obviously given the matter much thought as
they traveled and was prepared with an answer.
"We have three. If it is still behind us as you say, we can try to outrun it to the forest.
With a quick pace, there is a chance we might keep ahead of it and avoid an ambush in
the taller hills."
"How fast do you think the algors can move over this type of ground?" Ryson
questioned with more than a hint of doubt in his lowered voice.
"Not fast, but if we catch the shag off guard, it might be fast enough."
Ryson pictured the group charging off in hopes of making a mad dash to the trees. He
could imagine the shag would respond to such a tactic by increasing its own pace. The
shag would have to realize that they were aware of its presence. Such a revelation would
perhaps only lead to an immediate engagement. The group would probably be caught in a
state of confusion and unprepared to handle the attack. "That's too big a chance. What's
option number two?"
"Change our direction to the north and avoid the tall hills all together. Stay on the flat
level rock as we are on now and head for the Fuge River. Shags don't like the water.
"Why not?" Ryson asked quickly.
"They are natural enemies of the river rogues."
The mention of yet another mythical monster offered little if any consolation. "Won't
that mean we might be trading in one attacker for another?! I've heard about these river
rogues. I don't want to run into one of those, either. We might also not reach the river by
night fall. Do you really want to be caught out here not knowing if we're going to be
trapped between our friend back there and a river rogue ahead of us?"
"No," Holli replied simply. "But it is a better alternative then simply continuing
forward. I believe the shag will eventually attack once we reach the tall hills. At least if
we head to the river, there is a chance we might get away without running into a rogue."
"What about our third option?"
Holli looked directly into the eyes of the delver. She spoke with blunt determination.
"I can stay behind and cut off the shag while you lead the algors to safety. I have the
Sword of Decree. If I but touch the shag with the blade, it will flee. They are no fonder of
the burning touch of fire than they are of water."
"Out of the question," Ryson said flatly.
Holli did not retreat from her determined stance. "Do not be so hasty. It is the best of
the options. I will accept my chances of success. No matter what happens, it will
guarantee the safety of the algors and yourself."
Ryson shook his head. "You seem to forget one thing. You're now more important
than I am. I found the algors and have delivered my message. They have agreed to follow
us, but you have to bring them to your camp first. It is what you have promised them. If
we lose you, we can't fulfill that promise. You know the way back to your camp, I don't"
It was an undeniable lie. With his skills as a delver and his diligence toward recalling
trails, Ryson could have easily led them all back to the center of the elf camp. He did not,
however, wish to see Holli take such a risk as facing the shag alone. He also began to
develop an option of his own.
"There's a better way," Ryson stated firmly. "A safer way where no one will have to
actually face the shag. You will lead the algors back to your camp, and I'll stay behind
and keep the shag from following."
Holli immediately began to protest, but she held her tongue as Ryson spoke forcibly,
making it clear he wished to finish.
"Don't misunderstand me, I'm not trying to be a hero here, and I'm not talking about
facing it in some kind of fight. I don't want to get near it and I have no intention of doing
so. I'm talking about doing what I do best. I'll cover your trail and make a false one. I'll
lead it off away from you. I'll let it close enough to know that I'm still around, but no
where near where it can do any harm. I'll only have to do it for a little while, just long
enough to make sure you have time to get to the trees. It's the safest and smartest thing to
do."
"It is not smart to have you risk yourself for my well being," Holli finally interrupted.
"I'm an elf guard. What shall I say when I return to my camp without you? Shall I tell
them the truth, that you did my job for me?"
"Your job now is to protect the algors, not me. And to see to it that they reach your
camp. Which of your options allows that?"
"We can head for the river," Holli replied stubbornly.
"Is it your training which tells you we should increase the risk in our mission, or is it
your own pride?"
Holli did not answer; she stared callously at the delver.
"Get mad at me all you want," Ryson answered with feigned disgust. He did not wish
to anger or insult Holli. He admired her too much for that. Her presence was a true asset,
that could not be denied, but she now opposed what he believed was the most sensible
solution to their problem. "I'm asking you to look at this from a cold and logical
perspective. Forget it's me and you out here in the desert. Pretend it's only a hypothetical
problem, a problem that your superiors might pose. You have a delver with you that is no
longer critical to the mission. You must lead a party back to the camp in which only you
know the way. What should you do?"
"I can not answer that."
"Why not? Because you know I'm right."
Holli turned away for the first time. She threw both the empty shells and nuts to the
ground in frustration.
Ryson spoke calmly. "I trusted your abilities to protect me in the desert, now you have
to trust in mine. I can lead the shag away, I can move faster and quicker than it can.
You've seen what I can do. If you don't believe that, tell me now."
"I believe you can outmaneuver the shag," Holli replied grudgingly. She quickly,
however, added another fact she thought was also most relevant. "You have also never
faced a mountain shag. It is not wise for me to leave you in such a situation."
"I really don't think we have another choice. You're just going to have to trust me to
be careful. I will do everything ..."
"Very well," she cut him off. She continued to stare off into the distance, looking
anywhere but at the delver. Her response was as cold as the deepest sea. The proposal
annoyed her, perhaps even hurt or insulted her, but she could not win this argument. The
delver accurately placed the importance of the mission squarely in front of her. The
algors had to be led to Connel. If she left them, she would be failing in her duty. Her
desire to be the one to face the shag was based more on her own pride than pure logic and
duty. The delver had pointed that out clearly enough. Still, she could not easily forget her
past duties to the delver or her training to be the one that faced danger before those she
escorted. Mappel had entrusted her to protect him, but also to see the mission to its
fruition. She faced no easy choice. In the end, she accepted duty over pride. "Explain
your plan to the algors."
The delver nearly questioned her if she was sure, disbelieving she would agree
without more of a fight. He did not, however, say another word or press his luck. He
moved to the algors with an explanation as quickly a possible and without giving Holli a
chance to change her mind.
The algors listened intently with tilted heads, but made no comments. As he finished
his short instructions, they displayed total, as well as casual acceptance of the plan. They
simply gathered their bags and waited for Holli to guide them.
Before taking the lead, Holli moved to the delver. She removed the belt which held the
Sword of Decree and held the sheathed weapon out to Ryson. "Take good care of this,
bring it back with you to Connel and return it to Mappel."
"I won't need that," Ryson protested.
"I will not argue this," Holli stated bluntly. Her steely eyes accented her position.
"This sword was entrusted to me so I might use it to protect you. That was made clear
enough. You made a promise to Mappel, a vow that you would not part from the sword.
You promised you would stay by my side so that the sword would be near you. You also
vowed to remain watchful over the sword itself. If you wish me to leave you here, you
must take the sword."
Ryson saw in the elf's eyes that she would take no argument. If he did not take the
sword, she would not leave his side.
"Alright," he said reluctantly. "But I have no intention of using it."
"I honestly hope you have no need to. I urge restraint and caution against this shag. I
will be unable to assist in any fashion, for as you have clearly pointed out, it is now my
duty to bring these algors to Connel. I will tell Mappel of what happened and explain that
you have accepted the charge of carrying the sword."
"If I'm going to take your sword, you should at least take the one I was carrying." He
removed the belt which held the short sword he obtained from the captured goblin and
handed it to her. "I'll try to reach Connel before you or at least not too long after," he said
with a forced grin.
"I shall hope for that as well. Good luck, Ryson Acumen."


As soon as Holli lead the group of algors around the corner of a large boulder, she bid
them halt.
Ryson brought up the rear. He made a quick check behind him. Satisfied that the
boulder now blocked the view of anyone, or anything that trailed, he moved with
uncanny swiftness and precision. He immediately gathered up two dozen stones of
varying sizes. He had each algor rub each rock. He placed his dagger in his mouth, blade
outward, and his spyscope in his back pocket. He opened his pouch for the quick return
of the stones as well as the cores of the cactus fruit the algors ate during their previous
rest.
Ryson quietly pointed to a path close to a narrow cliff ledge. He made a swooping
motion with his hand to Holli, making it clear she was to circle to the northeast, using the
ledge and the rocks to hide their movements.
He then quickly motioned for the algors attention. He touched his head and bent it
down. He pointed to his feet and lifted his toes from the ground so his weight rested on
his heels. He looked back at the algors with an expression of expectancy.
The algors acknowledged the request without reluctance or hesitation. They duplicated
his actions, bowing their heads and lifting the claws on their toes from the ground. As
Holli waved a final good-bye, the algors followed with their heads low, crouched over.
They walked on the heels of their feet, keeping their claws clear from any surface. They
took their own leave of the delver with placid acceptance.
Ryson did not find the detached response even slightly surprising. He could not find it
within himself to blame the algors for their apparent lack of concern. Ryson simply
assumed that his departure from the group was nothing more than accepted activity for
the algors. He was being considered just another algor that decided it was time to break
from the pack. In that, Ryson found a slice of cheer. If these algors could accept him as
just another part of their community, perhaps all of the inhabitants of the land could
accept the inevitable changes they all faced.
He shrugged off his inner contemplations as he returned his concentration to the task
at hand. As the algors followed Holli toward a ravine, Ryson inspected the path they
walked. He moved quickly but softly over the ground the algors passed. Not a single
scratch mark. He nodded his head with satisfaction, but he took the precaution to wave
his hand just above the ground. A thin layer of rock dust swirled about, then settled
quickly. Any marks in the dirt were thus covered.
Certain the actual path was now well hidden, the delver set about marking a false trail.
He pulled the core of a cactus fruit and two of the stones from his pouch. He stepped off
in a direction opposite from the path taken by Holli. He dropped the first stone as he bent
low to the ground, and he tossed the second further off into the distance. He lightly pulled
the dagger from his teeth, and with dagger in one hand and the soft remains of the fruit in
the other, he began marking a trail.
Shuffling along, hunched over, Ryson moved with unbelievable speed. His hands
worked miracles in the fine arts known only to delvers. The dagger moved as if it knew
by itself what it must do. The crisp sharp tip created short shallow scrapes in the rocky
ground. Each scratch finished with a light curve as if made by an algor claw.
With his other hand, Ryson rolled, dotted, pressed, and nudged the fruit core against
the ground. He followed this trail with his nose as well as his eyes. He sniffed the air to
ensure sufficient amounts of juice spilled out of the core to leave a scent trail. As the core
disintegrated, he dropped it to the ground and smashed the remains under his boot. He
quickly outlined the shattered core with scratch marks. The results looked nothing more
than unwanted remains cast out and trodden underfoot.
Further and further he moved, staying as low to the ground as possible. He continued
laying the trail, digging into his pouch over and over until all the stones were cast upon
the ground and all the fruit cores were left behind. With his pouch empty, he surveyed the
long winding trail he had forged with satisfaction. He knew the markings were sufficient
to lead even the best tracker away from the actual path of the algors.
His only fear was that he might have been spotted while laying the trail. Try as he
might, he could not locate the actual position of the mountain shag, thus he could never
be sure if it still followed. If the shag saw only him, it might have seen through the
deception and returned to the last known position of the algors.
Ryson inspected the Sword of Decree which was sheathed and belted about his waist.
His hand slid over the jeweled handle. With the sword in his possession, Holli and the
algors were truly defenseless. He could picture the elf guard attempting to defeat the shag
with the goblin short sword. Holli had stated that facing the shag with the Sword of
Decree was risky. How much more dangerous was it to face the monster with a blade that
was only slightly longer than his own dagger?
He exhaled deeply as he looked back upon the trail. He had to make certain the shag
remained after him and had not doubled back.
He surveyed the land all about him. The steeper hills were closer now, within but a
few moments of a brisk delver run. The summit of a nearby hill would provide an
excellent view of the land stretching back toward the Lacobian desert. Two small trees
stood lazily off to the side, their growth stunted by the rocky terrain and paltry amounts
of water. The first tree grew but four paces from the end of the false trail.
Ryson stepped to its base and then gazed back to the first tall hill ahead. Gauging the
distance, he took his spyscope and inspected the sides up to the ridge. It met his needs.
With a snap of his wrist, his retracted the spyscope, and with the stones now gone, placed
it back in his pouch.
With his knife, he cut a small piece of cloth from the sleeve of his shirt. One quick
leap and he was already two branches up the tree and within reach of the highest branch.
He pulled the branch down toward him and tied the cloth to the very tip. As he released
it, he saw it bounce upward, bringing the cloth into clear sight. In but another moment, he
was out of the tree.
Once back to the end of the trail, he took one long look over his shoulder. He saw
nothing. With that, he took off towards the ridge.
The delver moved in a blur. As fast as he cut across the land, this also was not his top
speed. Slowing his pace, he scraped the heels of his feet along the ground rather than
bounce off the soles. Every now and again, he slowed to shuffle his feet wildly in all
directions. He glanced down to make sure his movements left the desired effect.
Anything with eyes could surely follow this trail.
Upon reaching the base of the hill, he chose a path which would lead him to the
previously selected ridge. He now cared little about leaving a trail or not. Step by step, he
scampered up the incline, his movements flowing with casual ease. Like a sudden warm
breeze rising up to the sky, he reached the summit without breaking stride.
At the hill's peak, he brought himself to an immediate halt and dropped to a squat. He
had not yet turned to regain sight of the false trail, but instead, he faced the horizon of the
northeast. Even as he crouched low, seeking obscurity among the abounding rocks, he
could not restrain from lifting his head to peer into the distance. The view was stunning.
Ahead of him, taller and wider hills lined the country side. Unlike mountains with
their steep slopes and jagged peaks each fighting for attention, the hills rested lazily,
comfortably out into the horizon. They blended together as much as they stood apart. He
could not help but think of the algors. If anything exemplified their willingness to come
together yet seek separation, it was this setting of dignified, uncomplicated scenic beauty.
The hillsides grew greener as Ryson looked farther to the north and east. While
countless rocks and boulders remained abundant, tall grass, small brush, even wild
flowers adorned the gradual slopes. While a greater variety and a greater number of trees
appeared along the landscape, they remained scattered in clumps. Their presence
magnified the rolling beauty of the landscape.
At the base of each hill, the grass and wild plants grew with much more vigor. The
green was thick and dark, forming passages of meadow which curved and branched off in
endless directions, a testament to the rains which could not break into the Lacobian desert
but could bring life to these hills. He could almost hear the welcome drops and the
gushing streams which would run down the slopes and collect at each base.
With a delver's eye, he examined some of the closer hills and noted the light crevices
running down the hillsides, a sure sign that the hilltops held snow in the winter. During
the thaw of planting season, the melting ice and snow would create temporary streams,
bringing even more water to the thick growth at the bottom.
Hills such as these always drew Ryson's interest. Some delvers lived to explore rivers,
or the shore lines of the sea. Still others sought out thick forests at the bases of tall
mountains, but nothing appealed to Ryson more than a natural setting of peaceful hills.
Other delvers might scoff at the idea, but Ryson marveled at the subtleties involved.
Each hill looked so much like another, each rested complacently within its boundaries.
They appeared as nothing more than a collection of sloped dirt and grass, even sometimes
to a delver's eye, but not to Ryson's eyes. Each hill in itself was a mystery to unravel.
Some would indeed turn out to be nothing more than solid empty mounds, while others
held secrets of long ravines, secret meadows, or even unexplored caves.
The sight of the hills pulled upon Ryson. It called to him, almost forcing him to forget
his true purpose for climbing to this ridge in the first place. This seemingly endless line
of hills could occupy his curiosity for months, and part of his soul yearned to explore the
flowing countryside with all due haste.
The attraction, however, was not strong enough to force the image of Holli and the
algors from his mind. Their plight reminded him of the shag. The hills would wait; in fact
they may even prove useful. For now, the matter of the shag remained of the utmost
importance.
Still squatting, Ryson shuffled completely about. He removed his spyscope from his
pouch. He moved only his arm, the rest of his body remained completely still. He brought
the scope to his eye, slowly, purposefully. Then, no motion at all escaped his body. If he
could be seen, he would have appeared lifeless, for even his chest remained unmoving, as
if he was no longer breathing. With one eye closed, he peered back towards the direction
in which he had come.
He immediately locked sight on the small scrap of sleeve he had knotted to the tree
branch. With his marker located, he angled the scope slightly back to the ground where
he pinpointed the false trail. Ryson followed the path as far back as possible. His elevated
position allowed him a greater perspective than at ground level, but the rocky landscape
prevented a clear view for any real distance.
The numerous boulders and ravines allowed for hundreds of hiding places, and the
shag could have been in or behind any of them. However, at the point where the trail
changed from the forged claw marks to Ryson's shuffling boots, the path would certainly
create confusion. If the shag in fact followed the false trail, it would be forced into the
open to inspect the markings. Ryson waited patiently for this revelation.
As moments passed, as the sun moved slowly overhead, a shifting breeze brought a
familiar scent to his nose. Ryson's nostrils flared to catch as much of the scent as
possible. He gauged the speed and direction of the breeze by noting the wave of crab
grass at his feet. The scent disappeared as the breeze died away, and Ryson's concern
died with it.
Without moving his head, the delver adjusted his view to the far left. Only the
spyscope and his eye shifted. His sight locked upon a cluster of rocks. There Ryson
stared, stared and waited for the inevitable.
Long moments passed. The scope remained on its target and Ryson's eye did not
blink. Through the lens of the scope, it bore down upon the rocks incessantly. It would
not stray for even the slightest moment.
As if rewarded for its persistence, Ryson's sight was granted its wish. The mountain
shag staggered reluctantly out from behind the cluster of rocks. As it paused, apparently
to sniff the air, Ryson commanded a clear view of a creature which he would have
considered part of a nightmare, another unthinkable monster like the crab-spider that
attacked Holli.
No doubt, it was tall. How tall, however, was difficult to gauge. Thick and long
matted fur, encrusted with dust and dirt, covered the creature from head to toe. It made it
impossible to distinguish where certain parts began and where others ended. Unable to
isolate the knees or the waist, Ryson could not determine whether the legs were bent or if
the creature was hunched over. And he certainly could not judge the actual length of the
arms for both remained close to its body, and they blended in with the brown fur of its
chest and its shoulders. Only the hands and face broke free from the thick hair.
Its hands were thick, meaty and wide. The fingers long but round with the total
absence of claws or even fingernails. Its face, encircled by the same filthy hair, held no
beauty or charm. A short muzzle hooked downward, tipped with a gray nose and
whiskers similar to a cat. Its mouth was uneven and never closed completely. It revealed
several slanting, uneven rows of jagged teeth. Gaps in the first row were filled with rough
fangs behind. Its eyes were set close together directly over the sloped muzzle. They
appeared to glisten with a yellow tinge whenever the sun rays hit them just right.
"It can probably see in the dark," Ryson spoke just above a whisper to himself but
watched the creature closely after he spoke.
The shag made no reaction. Instead, it lumbered hesitantly toward the trail marked by
the delver.
Ryson had tested the shag with his spoken words and he spoke again to himself of the
results. "And it's either a good actor or it doesn't have extremely sensitive hearing. Let's
see how it reacts to the end of the trail."
The shag slunk towards the open ground. Its head turned left and right as it
approached. It stopped only once, for but no more than an instant. It picked up a stone,
held it up to its nose, and tossed it away indifferently. Finally, it placed its hand upon the
last markings of Ryson's knife. It looked back down the trail where similar markings
abounded. When it turned its head forward to the high hills and to where Ryson remained
perched, it only tilted its head.
Apparent indecision and confusion hindered the shag as it considered the change in
the trail. It could easily see the scuff marks of Ryson's shuffling boots, but it could not
find any scratches which it first identified and followed when it spotted the group of
travelers crossing its territory.
"A little slow witted," Ryson murmured. A smile crossed the delver's lips. His
enthusiastic enjoyment grew with every new shred of knowledge he procured from
watching and analyzing the movements and reactions of the monster. A delver's blessing
was before him; an entirely new species to examine.
The shag continued to move about with indecision, its nose and eyes passing across
the broken path. Eventually, it spotted the lighter trail to the small tree where Ryson used
the sleeve cloth as a marker.
"Very impressive," Ryson conceded. "I wonder if it found it with its eyes or its nose."
He spoke a little louder each time, testing the range of the shag's hearing.
Still, the shag showed no sign of picking up the sound. Instead, it followed the nearly
invisible trail which led to the tree with the marker.
"I'm not sure, though, if I want it to find that. It may figure out what I'm doing. Maybe
I can confuse it a bit more."
With steady, deliberate motion, Ryson moved his arm to the ground and felt for a
stone which fit the palm of his hand. His movement was so controlled, so steady, it would
have barely attracted the attention of someone standing right next to him. With rock in
hand, he cocked his arm back with the same preciseness. With one quick fluid movement,
the stone sailed across the sky. It split the air, a screaming missile, as it soared away from
the hill top. Its direction would lead it to the ground a good fifty paces away from the
shag, but in the opposite direction of the tree.
Before the stone hit the ground, the shag spun and fixed its glance directly upon
Ryson's position. It stood taller than it had before, its shoulders pulled back. The thick
hands opened wide, the fingers trembled with apparent anger.
Through his spyscope, Ryson watched the shag's indecisive expression roar into an
angry sneer. Its yellow eyes never left the ridge where Ryson crouched motionless, even
when the stone finally hit its mark.
"So it can spot movement pretty quickly," Ryson whispered, his lips did not move. He
watched the monster with a growing understanding of the developing situation. "It knows
something is here, but it's not sure what. That means it can see fairly well, but it's better at
spotting motion than at focusing over great distances. It's going to wait for me to move
first so it can figure out what it's up against. Let's see if I can't use that to make sure Holli
gets to the trees with no trouble."
Ryson remained absolutely still, as did the shag. The furry monster could sense
Ryson's presence, but it waited for the delver to move before it would make an advance.
For now, it had the location of its quarry. It was apparently willing to let the prey make
the first move, hoping and expecting it to be a critical mistake.
The delver waited with monumental patience. He felt no urge to run, no anxiety over
being watched so intently by the shag. He was accomplishing his mission, for if the shag
remained in his sights it could not be chasing Holli or the algors. He allowed the day to
pass with the two of them locked in this battle of inactivity. He judged the elapsing time
by watching the shadows extend. When the sun reached a point halfway between noon
day high and sunset, he decided it was time to end the stalemate.
Certainly by now, Holli and the others were safely within the trees and heading toward
the heart of Dark Spruce Forest. All that was left was to secure his own safety and all
would be well.
The obvious option was to escape toward freedom as quickly as possible. He could
leave the shag behind by running off at top speed. Considering his own abilities, he
believed he would be halfway to the forest before the shag could make a decision. Being
a delver, however, Ryson considered other alternatives, options he chose to pursue.
There was so much to left to learn of this creature, so many questions left unanswered.
Ryson had only observed a fraction of the shag's tracking and hunting abilities. If he
would face this new world with shags and goblins, if this was what the re-emergence of
the magic dictated, he would need greater knowledge of each new dark creature in order
to survive as a delver. With a shag in sight and upon his preferred terrain, he could not let
the opportunity pass by.
With his own decision cast, Ryson leapt upward and darted over the hilltop behind
him and out of sight of the shag. He did not continue down the slope. Instead, he dropped
to the ground upon his chest. He kept his spyscope in his hand. He waited. One breath.
Two breaths. Stomach to the ground, he slithered back over the peak and brought himself
into view of the shag's position.
Nothing. The shag had moved, and moved quickly.
"So it can make a snap decision when it has to," Ryson noted.
Turning his head slowly, Ryson scanned the ground closer to the base of the hill. The
shag moved furiously at full speed. It covered ground in amazing time. Two thick, hairy
legs pummeled the ground ferociously as they propelled the shag forward.
"I can outrun it, but I can't fool with it," Ryson gave the creature its due. "If I get cute,
it might actually catch me." The delver watched for but a split second more as it assessed
the shag's direction. "It's circling the hill and expects me down there. I shouldn't
disappoint it."
Again, Ryson leapt over the hilltop but this time with the intention of running all the
way down. With fluid yet powerful strides of his own, the delver plowed downward.
Ryson forced his eyes open as wide as possible and increased his peripheral vision to a
greater range. He reached the hill's base, crossed a small gorge which rested in front of a
second and taller hill, and started up that slope just as the shag rounded the first hillside
and came into his view.
The delver allowed for one quick glance up the hillside he ascended. In that moment,
he noted all potential hazards and the quickest path to the top. With that image painted
crisply in his mind, he slowed his speed and turned his head over his shoulder to watch
the pursuit of the shag.
Ryson watched with interest to see its next decision. Would it follow him up this hill
or try yet again to intercept by cutting around the base?
The shag showed no reluctance this time at following the delver's path directly. It
must have believed its speed superior and it bounded upward directly behind the delver.
The creature has confidence in its speed, Ryson thought. If it didn't think it would
catch me, it wouldn't follow and waste so much energy.
The shag handled the incline of the hill without the slightest difficulty. If anything,
moving on a slope, even an ascending slope, added to the creature's speed and dexterity.
The uneven ground aided the shag's movements, movements which were designed for
even the taller slopes of mountains. A tractable joint at the creature's hip actually allowed
the shag to proportion the extension of each leg to adjust for the slope of any hill or
mountain, an attribute duly noted by the delver. Level ground rendered this sliding joint
rather useless, but slopes in any direction allowed for full utilization and an advantage
over those with fixed hip joints.
Ryson, however, ran at a pace which matched the shag's exactly. Their current pace
was perhaps slightly more than half Ryson's top speed. It was a pace Ryson could
maintain for long periods without any true stress, and the creature could not gain even a
step as they rose to the top of this second hill.
Ryson charged over this hilltop. His head swirled to allow for another quick scan of
the back slope. The descent offered a few obstacles, a patch of loose rocks, a few areas of
tall weeds, but nothing to be overly concerned about.
A wide-mouthed grin enveloped his face - a delver's true dream; pure exhilaration.
Not only was he defining and categorizing the abilities of a mountain shag, he was now
locked in a thrilling competition. This was as much a test for his own abilities as it was a
learning experience. He would not be content in simply outdistancing the shag. There
was more to be gained here, a greater opportunity at stake. The charging shag afforded
him the chance to pit his greatest skills and cunning against a mysterious monster with
unique abilities of its own.
For safety sake, however, Ryson would influence the decisions of the shag; he would
impose his own restrictions on the options afforded to the monster. The shag might
believe that it determined the pace and direction of the chase, indeed Ryson hoped it
would, but it was the delver who would decide where they would go and how they would
proceed.
The shag fell mindlessly into the delver's will. It moved as much on anger as it did on
instinct. It growled and roared as it raced behind the quick moving delver. It showed only
minor ability for tactics and strategy as Ryson dictated more and more of the struggle.
If the delver felt the shag slowing, Ryson reduced his own pace. The gap between
them closed and the shag would experience renewed energy at the prospect of ending the
chase. With but a snap of his boots, Ryson would extend the gap once more. Thus, the
chase continued over several hills. Influenced highly by Ryson's maneuvers, the shag at
times followed directly behind, otherwise it circled around the base of a hill trying to cut
off its intended victim. On such occasions, Ryson answered with different tactics.
Stopping at the top to challenge the shag to ascend or changing directions and descending
over the same path he used to climb, he would then wait to see how the shag would react.
Ryson monitored the shag's apparent willingness to follow over certain obstacles as well
as its tolerance for frustration. The shag showed mostly perseverance, almost
stubbornness, even as the chase lingered.
Ryson marveled at the shag's endurance. No signs of heavy breath, no signs of muscle
fatigue. Except for a few fleeting moments of indecision as to how to follow, the shag
maintained its pounding stride.
The delver forced the chase northward, towards higher elevations. All the while he
kept his own strength and ability in check. Hiding the full extent of his own endowments,
disguising what he could truly do, he forced the shag to reveal every secret of its own.
By the time they were charging across long valleys thick with vegetation, Ryson
acquired a wealth of information. He understood that a shag's abilities would vary in
degree from individual to individual, but there were certain attributes he now understood
with great consciousness.
As the pursuit continued, Ryson noted they were closing upon the Fuge River. The
benefits of the chase dwindled as the delver found little else in the way of useful
information. The thought of river rogues made the delver realize that the risks were now
growing. In gleaning all that there was to know from this particular shag, it was time to
end the contest.
At first he maintained his present speed. He chose a tall hill to his right and ascended
with his eyes forward. He no longer bothered to watch his pursuer. Upon crossing over
the summit and out of sight of the shag, he propelled himself at top speed. A blur of
motion cut down the green hillside. At the base of the hill, he made a half turn, again to
his right. He was now heading southeast and back in the general direction of Dark
Spruce. He rounded the base of yet another hill as he gave one last backwards glance at
the shag. It was just now reaching the summit of the last hill. Its head was turned in the
opposite direction. If it caught Ryson's final burst of speed, it could do nothing about it.
The delver was finished with this chase and beyond the shag's grasp.


The roaring fire snapped and crackled, brittle dry twigs and branches bursting nonrhythmically. 
Waist-high flames speared out and up in broken, jagged lines. They
reached upward, higher and higher, beating back the darkness of the overhead sky. Ryson
was careful to set the blaze in a clearing with no branches overhead, thus the glow simply
extended upwards, gently erasing the darkness above with nothing to reflect it back to the
waiting ground.
Ryson located this particular clearing beneath the slope of a hill which extended to the
edge of Dark Spruce Forest. The hills died off to the east as heavy, thick pines graced the
lower flatlands with abundance. This was one of the last hills in the area and the
surrounding smattering of large pines and deciduous trees basked in the pounding
radiance of the tall flames.
Flickering, dazzling firelight illuminated everything within a radius of twenty maybe
thirty paces. The blaze blocked out the light from shimmering stars and cast a brightness
around the camp which nearly matched the light of dawn. Such a fire could be seen for
miles, and such was the delver's intent.
Ryson huddled but a few steps from the base of the flames. He rested prone on the
ground with his head on a soft piece of sod and without a blanket. The nights remained
cool, even during the advent of the growing season. The fire, however, provided more
than sufficient heat. It was fed with large amounts of quick-burning, dry wood. Another
pile of long dead logs stood off to the side, far enough from the blaze to ensure safety
from sailing red-hot embers, large enough to feed the blaze for the entire night.
Ryson only stirred from his spot when the fire threatened to lose its brilliance. If the
flames dwindled, even slightly, he rose from his makeshift bed and carried himself
begrudgingly to the stack of wood. He cradled a stack of timber in his arms, far more
than sufficient to keep the flames alive, and carried them to the blaze. He dumped them
unceremoniously into the fire and returned to the ground and his pillow of grass.
He showed no signs of outward agitation, did not peer into the darkness in any
direction. He simply moved about his camp as if he was alone, even though he knew he
was not.
It was not the shag returning to his trail. He had left it a great distance back in the hills
to the north. Certainly by now, that particular monster was either on the trail of some new
prey or seeking shelter from the night. No, this was not a shag, not the one he had
escaped and not a second one seeking a claim to this territory. It was something that
followed with different techniques, different intentions, something that knew more about
the delvers abilities and took the precaution to cloak itself in the distance.
It was the same presence which he sensed before he parted with Holli and the algors,
the presence that only the delver's keen senses could distinguish. This set of eyes was still
upon him. It remained with him even as he and the mountain shag began their chase
through the hills. It lagged behind as the encounter progressed, but Ryson always felt the
nagging existence of the watchful eyes. It was when Ryson turned away from the shag
and sped to freedom, ending that particular chase once and for all that the delver truly
honed in on the second follower. Ryson's sudden moves and speed must have surprised
the distant pursuer, caught it out of position and unprepared. Ryson extracted a full taste
of the scent from the air. It was a scent he knew, the scent of a human.
He could have vanished from these eyes as easily as he broke free from the pursuit of
the shag. His rising and undying questions over the matter, however, kept him from
making any such move. The shag apparently followed because it felt its territory was
being invaded or it was interested in obtaining a meal. As for this new twist, there was no
easy explanation for a human on his trail. The revelation added to the curious nature of
the situation.
As he had allowed the shag to remain within reach in order to learn the secrets of the
monster, he considered doing more of the same. He had debated the issue as he made his
path more east than south. He would not head into the heart of Dark Spruce, for it was not
necessary for him to return to the elf camp. His destination now was back to Connel. He
intended to travel through the thinner northern branch of the forest, cutting due east and
making a trail directly to Burbon. There he could obtain an ale, listen for news, perhaps
even enjoy a meal of fresh bread and warm stew before speeding on to Connel.
Through the end of the day as the sun waned in the western sky, he had maintained a
pace which would allow the human to continue his or her pursuit. He did nothing to draw
the human in closer and made no attempt to become the pursuer. While he could have
caught any human so close to him, he doubted he would have any questions answered if
he made such a move. Normally, humans became belligerent to the point of hostile when
chased and caught.
As the first true signs of the thickening forest came within his sight, he could not
restrain his growing curiosity. Not only was he being followed, he was being tracked by
an expert. With his curiosity rising, he developed his own plan to force the mysterious
tracker out of position.
At the setting of the sun, Ryson had chosen his campsite. It was not out of fear of
losing his way, or losing the human which brought his travel to a halt. And it was not
fatigue. But Ryson was tired, tired of feeling the shadow behind him, tired of moving on
without learning anything more. It was time to tempt the human, time to force a mistake.
He would reel the follower in by using his own apparent carelessness as bait.
The brightness of the fire illuminated a large patch of land, but it added to the
darkness of the forest and the hills which lay beyond its own range. Fire, large flames
especially nearby, hampered a delver's night vision as easily as if he looked directly into
the sun. Thus, the border between light and dark was as distinct as a line in the sand, and
anyone or anything could be hiding behind that curtain of darkness.
As obscurity crept deeper in with the night, Ryson relied more and more upon his ears
and his nose. His eyes were shut anyway as he feigned sleep. He only stirred when his
body felt the warmth of the fire weaken ever so slightly. It was then he would make his
routine amble to the makeshift wood pile. As he walked, he grunted and rubbed his back,
gave signs of weariness and muscle fatigue. He would take this innocent opportunity,
however, to smell the air, gain a new fix on the human, who was indeed drawing closer,
moving in to take advantage of the delver's apparent recklessness.
With his last trip to feed the blaze, Ryson could not keep the hair on his neck from
rising. The human was at the edge of the darkness, behind the trunk of a fairly large oak,
waiting and watching as quiet and as motionless as the dust on the rocks. Ryson knew as
well as the follower that there was no turning back now. The human was in a position to
advance not to retreat. Any such change would give away the edge of surprise, and the
human had been too careful for Ryson to consider that a possible alternative.
If this human was half as good as Ryson believed, he would wait for Ryson to return
to the ground into a defenseless position, perhaps wait a few more moments, and then
make his move. As Ryson dropped log after log into the consuming fire, he fought back
the urge to look directly toward the spot where the human waited. He paused but a
moment to rub his hands in front of the flames, a move he had made several times before,
a move that would not alarm the human. With a casual turn, he stepped back to the sod
pillow, dropped to the ground and spread out facing the fire. He closed his eyes and
waited like a coiled spring.
The twang of a bow string pierced the night sounds of the crackling fire and the
musical crickets. Before Ryson heard the cutting swish of the arrow through the air, he
had tumbled to his left and rolled to his feet. The arrow plunged into the ground where
his right leg had been stretched. His hand automatically encircled the handle of the Sword
of Decree, but he left it sheathed. He did not know how the glowing blade would react to
the firelight but he wished to keep its powers a secret until absolutely necessary.
He barked out orders with anger and determination. "Come into the light. The
darkness won't help you. I know exactly where you are and I don't have to see you to
know if you move. I can dodge your arrows all night without seeing them. If you try to
run, I'll catch you. I'm a delver and you won't be able to escape."
"I know who ya are." Evan Chase spat as he walked into the flickering, wavering
light. A second arrow remained in his bow string, the string pulled back slightly. "I don't
intend on runnin'."
"And what is it you do intend on doing?" Ryson asked in a low cold voice. "Kill me
with an arrow? Best of luck."
"That first one wasn't aimed to kill ya," Evan sneered back. "I need to have a word
with ya first. That's why I aimed for your knee. I didn't think you knew I was on ya, but I
should have figured that from a delver." He said the last word with absolute disgust; as if
there was nothing worse he could call someone.
"I was on to you long before I built this fire," Ryson scoffed, hoping to demean the
tracker, for he understood the hate in Evan Chase's words and in his eyes. "Even with a
shag to distract me, I sensed you. None of your kind can hide from a true delver." He said
it proudly and watched with satisfaction as Chase's eyes burned.
"My kind? You watch your mouth."
"Let's get on with this," Ryson demanded with his own look of disdain. His expression
made it clear he found the encounter tiresome, annoying. "You can try firing arrows at
me all night, that's if I let you, but you still won't hit me. You know it and I know it."
"Maybe I do, and maybe I don't." With long practiced precision and swiftness, the
tracker pulled the bow string fully back and let the second arrow fly. It passed harmlessly
into the darkness beyond the range of the firelight. Ryson was a full stride away by the
time it passed where he had been standing. The quickest movements of even the fastest
humans appeared as slow motion to the delver.
Ryson grunted his disapproval at the pointless attempt. "Let's hope you know for sure
now. I can move faster than you can think. That's obvious."
Anger erupted in the face of the tracker. His cheeks turned crimson, noticeable even in
the yellow and orange light of the fire. He tossed his bow to the ground and pulled a long
hunting knife from a sheath of animal skin at his waist. The blade, nearly as long as
Ryson's forearm, sparkled with sharpness. Chase gripped the brown wooden handle with
furious tension.
Ryson laughed a hearty laugh. He kept his eyes on the tracker, but they glistened in
enjoyment of the spectacle. "Now you're just being ridiculous. If I can dodge your
arrows, don't you think I can dodge your pathetic attempts at trying to stab me?"
The tracker grimaced but said nothing.
Ryson allowed his own laughter to subside. He took a deep breath, allowed his mirth
to drift back to serious concentration. His muscles tensed ever so slightly, as if preparing
to spring upon his foe. Controlled determination filled his form. He glared at the tracker
with intensity previously unmatched. Even the tracker with all his hate and prejudice
retreated slightly from the scowl.
"I'm not going to waste much more time with you. You said you wanted a word with
me." Ryson's words tumbled from his mouth in a bitter snarl. "This is your chance. What
is it you want?"
Chase sized up the delver's defiant stand. He decided to press for the scraps of
information he desired. "I want to know where ya've been and what you're up to."
"Why?" Ryson mouthed the one word question as his eyes drove nails into the
tracker's own face.
"It's a job," Chase replied with a noncommittal shrug.
Being a delver and accepting commissions from others to explore lands and complete
tasks, Ryson understood the tracker's simple answer. "Who hired you?" he demanded
with authority.
"Consprite," the tracker answered without hesitation.
"Why?" Ryson repeated.
"I don't know, didn't ask. Don't care," Chase said with finality, making it clear he
wouldn't say anything more of it.
Ryson shook his head with as much disbelief as disgust. "So you just want me to tell
you what I've been up to? That's absurd. You're a tracker. You've been following me; you
should know where I've been."
Chase grunted a satisfied snort. He found great delight in explaining things to the
delver, as if it made him better, smarter than Ryson. "Not exactly. I started only a day
ago. I found both of your trails in the trees of Dark Spruce. The older one went off to
follow the trail of the tremor. The other was going to lead me to the desert. I'm not a real
lover of the forest so I took the fresher one, especially since it would get me out of these
cursed trees. Found your trail in the sand pretty easily, but ya know what? Soon as I got
started into the Lacobian, I saw you and a lot of others coming back to me. I got out of
sight and waited for you to pass. I figured as long as I had you in my sights, I might as
well not lose ya."
"So you decided to follow directly and forget the trail," Ryson acknowledged. "I still
don't see what you need to know."
Evan decided to take advantage of the opportunity to throw yet another insult.
"Delver's ain't too smart, are they? I said I had a job. Consprite wanted me to follow your
trail from beginning to end, wanted to know all about where you've been and what you've
been up to. Told me I should follow the trail, but I like to do things my way. Now, I can't
say what ya found when you followed the tremor and what made ya turn back to the
desert. I can't even say what you found out in the desert, but I saw what you had with
you. I figured the girl was with you in the forest. I saw signs of two when you first went
in. But those other things, I don't even know what they were, let alone why you were
leading 'em out of the desert. I figure I can get what I need to know out of you. You'll tell
me where you've been and what you've been up to, won't ya?"
"And if I don't?" It was more of a taunt than a question.
Chase's face turned even brighter with the crimson hue of his emotions, of his hate for
delvers. "If you don't, I'll cut you a little at a time." He held the knife threateningly
toward his adversary.
Ryson held his laughter in check this time. He pressed the tracker. "That's not even a
threat. I could leave you behind in an instant. I could be out of your sight so fast, you
won't know in what direction I left. As for following my trail, forget it. I won't leave one.
You know it and I know it."
"I also know something else," Chase responded belligerently. "I may not be able to
pick up your trail, but I can pick up the trail of the girl and those things she's with.
They're no delvers, they're careless. I can get what I need to know from them. I know you
wouldn't like that, that's why you led that hairy mountain monster away from them. Yeah,
I saw that thing shag followin' ya. I picked him up about the same time I saw you come
out of the desert. I stayed clear of that thing, but I kept my eyes on what you were doin'. I
saw ya set the phony trail to keep him away from your friends there. I won't follow no
fake trail. I'll go right after 'em, even if it means followin' 'em in the forest. You wouldn't
be at all happy about that, would ya?"
"No, I wouldn't," Ryson growled. "So you should know I won't let you."
"So how ya gonna stop me?" the tracker responded with a new gleam in his eye. "Ya
gonna fight me? If you do I have my chance to cut ya. Or you can run, and I'll cut the
girl." He paused to enjoy the dilemma he left the delver with, but then made it clear
which option he preferred. "Now, I don't really want to go after those others. I want to
hear what you got to say. I want to hear it from you. You're the one I'm supposed to
follow. I want to know what you found while following the quake, what you found in the
desert, what those things are that were with you and why you're bringin' 'em out of the
desert." He paused again, and fixed a glance upon the sword at the delver's side. "I also
want ya to hand over that nice sword of yours. It'll fetch a nice price. Reward me for
dealin' with a filthy delver."
"I can't do that," Ryson said simply.
The tracker offered Ryson the only other option he allowed. "So then you want me to
start after the others?"
"I can't let you do that, either." As clearly as Mappel's words over protecting the
sword echoed in Ryson's mind, his acceptance over protecting Holli and the algors rang
in his spirit. He would not let this man take his sword or hurt those that had previously
traveled with him.
"Then, you're gonna have to stop me." The tracker's smile grew for but a second, then
it disappeared completely. He turned to his left with a sharp upheaval of motion. His eyes
left the delver as if Ryson had vanished. It was as if something took hold of his mind,
forced all knowledge of the delver from his consciousness. Chase's face now turned white
as both hands now gripped the handle of the long dagger, but it was no longer held out at
the delver. He stammered at its new target, but no words escaped from his mouth.
She walked into the firelight as softly as a summer's breeze. Dried twigs refused to
snap under her light step as she entered the campsite without making a single sound. She
stood but a few paces from the tracker's left hand side and almost directly across the
campsite from Ryson.
Ryson was no doubt as surprised at her emergence as the tracker. He had not sensed
her presence at any point during his travels. Indeed, he was not sure he sensed her now.
She gave off no scent and still made no sound, but he could not deny his own eyes or the
troubled response of the tracker. The delver shaded his eyes from the fire in order to
make a closer inspection.
She wore a long dark brown coat which stretched to her ankles. It swirled about her
lightly, but the fabric made no noise. It was buttoned up tight to her neck. Her arms hung
low in front of her, her hands clasped together at her middle. She wore no rings and no
necklace. Short dirty blonde hair hung just above her shoulders. Her face mysteriously
avoided the firelight. Only dark green eyes reflected any light at all, and they remained
fixed on the tracker.
Ryson stepped to the side, moving the fire away from his path of sight to the stranger.
Still, he could not obtain a good view of her face.
"Who are you?" he demanded sternly.
The woman made no acknowledgment. Her stare remained fixed upon the tracker. She
stepped, or rather glided towards Evan Chase. Her hands unfolded and reached outward.
They grabbed him at the shoulders. Long nails dug into the hides which made his shirt.
Ryson believed he could see small stains appear at the end of each finger. She had drawn
blood and it seemed to delight even amuse her. As her mouth curled with a tight smile,
Ryson saw something else for the first time. Fangs. Fangs in a human mouth.
The woman opened her mouth as she held Evan in an unbreakable grip, a grip as
strong as a man's over twice her size, perhaps a grip like the shag's. When her mouth
opened, the light which avoided her face glistened off the two snow white fangs. She
turned her head slightly and pulled the tracker's left shoulder into her bosom. His neck
was within a hand's span of her mouth.
The tracker found his voice. A soul shrieking howl erupted from his lips. In the last
seconds of his life, he plunged the knife into her midsection. He turned the blade back
and forth, pressed it ever deeper.
The woman paid no mind. She thrust her head downward and the snow white fangs
turned red in Evan Chase's blood. One single word tattooed itself in Ryson's mind.
Vampire.
It was nearly inevitable, and not at all surprising. Ryson Acumen would reach a point
where he would have to question his own sanity, wonder if he could define the borders
between runaway nightmares and reality. Was he now simply walking through the land,
half asleep, half awake, but totally immersed in dementia? With each step of the journey,
with each new encounter, logical, reasonable thought would demand an examination of
this possibility. The delver had reached that point.
In the flickering firelight, the unidentified woman - the vampire - maintained her hold
on the tracker, both with her hands and with her fangs. Her face remained a shadow. Her
fangs also now dodged the light, for they were fully embedded in raw flesh. Only her hair
and her swaying, silent coat were truly clear to the delver's eyes. That, and of course, her
victim.
Evan Chase struggled as first, desperately twisting the knife which was embedded in
the midsection of his attacker. His eyes betrayed his fear, the whites glowing hotter than
the fire. Thankfully, his screech of pure terror died away, replaced by grunts and moans
as he worked with frantic hysteria upon the knife's handle.
The woman ignored both his snarls and the knife. Despite the vicious grinding of the
long blade, there was no sign of pain or even harm. Ryson imagined the wound in the
woman's abdomen must now be cavernous, large enough for nearly every organ to simply
fall out, yet he could not find even the slightest trail of blood leaking to the ground. The
only sign of blood remained on the shoulder of the tracker, and just below the area where
the vampire's mouth held him. A small dark stain blotted the collar of his shirt. It grew no
bigger even as the sharp teeth remained in the tracker's jugular. The woman was not
allowing any of the red liquid to escape her hunger.
With finality, the trackers eyes closed. His hands fell from the blade and dropped to
his sides as his knees buckled. He was no longer struggling, or for that matter, sustaining
his own weight. The color of life left his cheeks as surely as the blood was drained from
his body. His head drooped forward, fell against the shoulder of the woman that now held
him up to finish her feast.
It was not unwillingness to help the tracker that kept Ryson from moving forward, it
was not fear. It was the question of his own sanity. Could this really be happening?
Perhaps, it was no stranger than speaking to ghosts, running from shags, or meeting
algors, but this one vision shattered the confidence in his ability to reason.
Ryson Acumen heard most of the stories involving the legends, including the stories
of vampires. He was also sure he heard the word spoken when he and Lief Woodson
went to explore Sanctum. He might have even said it himself. Vampires. They existed in
a time when goblins and shags, like the ones he had already seen, walked the land and
challenged the order of Uton. Yet even as he accepted the existence of goblins and shags
into his reality, he was not sure he could accept this, not sure it was truly happening.
Delusions. A new word exploded in his mind. It was the alternative he faced. Was he
bending the border between dreams and reality? Was his mind calling on his memory of
the legends in some bizarre and uncontrollable way. Was any of this really happening?
He was not given a chance to answer this question. His shock and uncertainty were
broken by Evan Chase's collapsing body. No longer in the grasp of the woman's hands or
teeth, he crumbled to the ground in a thud which sounded hollow.
The woman turned her attention first to the knife in her stomach. She pulled it out with
indifference. The blade shined clean in the firelight. As she tossed it away, Ryson's eyes
followed the sparkling blade in disbelief. The woman chuckled lightly and Ryson's eyes
returned to her. He still could not distinguish a single feature of her face other than her
sparkling green eyes.
"Should I make a glutton of myself this evening?" Her voice was cold and warm,
appealing as well as repugnant at the same time. "I have walked a long time alone. It
would be a shame to let you go."
Ryson bit back his fear, made every attempt to clear from his mind the doubts of his
sanity. If he needed to question his reasoning, this was not the time. Still, the questions
nagged at him and he remained at a loss of what to do. The woman made no immediate
sign of approach, and Ryson found strength in the distance that remained between them.
"Why did you do that?" He was not sure why he asked that particular question, but he
felt a need to understand the horror of what he witnessed.
"It was necessary," she responded simply. She licked her lips but made no other
movement. The fire glistened only for a second against the fangs which were again
hidden behind those same lips.
"You killed him," the delver emphasized.
"He will walk again."
Ryson shuddered at the thought.
The woman laughed a laugh that contained no warmth at all and it chilled Ryson to
the marrow. "It is not so bad; you will see that for yourself."
"No," Ryson protested weakly.
"Are you sure?"
"I won't let you near me."
The woman stood silent for long moments. Her eyes glistened like emeralds in bright
sunlight. Ryson felt a biting cold in his soul.
"You are a delver," she announced suddenly. "You do have the power to avoid me, but
do you have the desire?"
Ryson's thoughts turned as gray as an early morning fog. A dull throbbing obstructed
any attempt to organize them.
"What are you talking about?" he gurgled.
"You want to run don't you?" the woman murmured. The coldness disappeared. Her
voice was now almost enticing. "But you won't. You want to know more about me, don't
you?"
Ryson managed a nod.
"I see your thoughts in your face. You think I'm a vampire, or a dream. Maybe I'm
both. You no longer know what's real. I can help you with that. I can give you the
answers to everything you ever wished to know."
Ryson could not lift the growing fog which swirled about his every thought. The
woman seemed to inch forward, but he was not certain.
"So many things you have seen and felt." The woman continued with a soothing,
knowing voice. "So many things with no answers. You want those answers, you need
those answers."
Again, Ryson nodded. His tongue was as heavy and as confused as his thoughts. His
ability to speak had left him.
The woman was indeed closer to him now. The fire was no longer between them. It
was behind her and even her coat was now hidden to him by the shadows. Her eyes,
however, remained visible even as they sparkled with the warmth of spring.
"I can end your confusion; bring to you the knowledge of what you so desire. Isn't that
what you've always wanted? A delver's dream come true? And there is no emptiness in
my promise. You know that. I speak the truth. Give yourself over to me and you will
know more than you have ever known."
The words rang crisp and clear in Ryson's ears. He heard them, understood them.
Every syllable she spoke cut through the fog, cut through the confusion. Yet both
remained after the echo of her words died away. He could not order his own thoughts, or
make his own decisions or judgments. Her words were so simple, so profoundly true. He
could not help but accept everything she said, simply because she said them.
He stood still, captivated by the eyes which somehow stood out from the darkness. No
other movement detracted his attention. She also appeared to stand motionless, even as
she crept closer.
She now stood within arm’s reach. The bewitching words ceased to flow from her
lips. All encompassing silence. The birds, the insects, all sounds of the surrounding forest
and hills halted. Even the crackling of the fire died away. Was it the cloud in his head
which blocked out the sound, or did even fire obey the command of the vampire?
Ryson stood in no condition to consider the question. The heaviness of the moment
drowned out nearly all consciousness. He slouched, but remained on his feet, and
continued staring into the emerald eyes.
She was on him. She held him with the same grip as she held the tracker, pulled him
toward her with the same force. Her eyes remained locked with his as she pulled him
closer, and he could not resist her.
Ryson was not even certain what was happening. The fog rolled through his mind
even when her nails cut into his own shoulder, just as they broke the skin of the tracker.
He did not feel the pain. He did not feel fear, until she turned her eyes to his bare throat.
With the break in the stare, a small degree of the confusion and the fog lifted. He knew
where he was and what was about to happen. He felt the piercing pain in his upper arms
from her grip.
The small hole in the blanketing fog gave way at first to a scream of fear. Then,
miraculously, his delver instincts rushed through the gap. He was aware he was in great
danger. He needed to save himself.
Instinctively, his fingers found the handle of the Sword of Decree. As his hand
encircled the hilt, all confusion and doubt evaporated, cast away like the outgoing tide. A
certainty - a sharp purpose and understanding filled his mind. This was no dream and he
was not insane. He could feel the energies of the sword rise through his arm. He even felt
the energies that filled the air. He sensed their impurities, the taint given to them by the
sphere, but he acknowledged their presence. The sphere was real, the goblins were real,
the shag was real, even this vampire was real. And he knew now how to deal with her.
It was at that moment that delver swiftness saved his life, saved his soul. His right arm
free, except for at the shoulder, he pulled at the hilt with all the speed he could muster.
The blade came free of its sheath and stood boldly out in the night air.
Just as the vampire was about to sink her teeth into her second victim, she howled in
pain. She released her hold on the delver and stumbled away.
Ryson Acumen held the sword proudly and showed not the slightest sign of surprise.
The firelight, as well as the distant starlight, radiated off the sword with magnified
brilliance. The campsite was as bright as noon day, and the beams of light burned the
revealed skin of the vampire.
"Vampires hate the light, don't they?" Ryson growled with anger. In this one
encounter, he would learn to hate vampires over all the other creatures of the dark. He
loathed having his mind controlled, despised the powers to confuse and entice with false
hopes. He cursed them. He cursed the vampire and would never forget what she had been
able to do to him. In that moment, he wanted revenge. "Fire can't harm you, but this light
can. It's not just fire, it's the starlight magnified. It's as harmful to you as the sun."
The woman, now hunched over but still on her feet, did not reply. She made a quick
break for the darkness and the safety of the trees. Her speed was surprising, but no match
for the delver's.
He cut her off with ease and again held the sword to her face. "You're not getting
away."
She hissed. Her face was now clear to him, revealed by the light of the sword. Pasty
gray skin clung closely to her skull. The eyes, which were now more gray than green,
retracted into her sockets. Long eyelashes, a petite nose, and blood red lips gave the
sorrowful feeling that she attempted to appear more feminine than the rest of her face
would allow. That same face now contained two scorch marks, one on each cheek.
Ryson looked back into her eyes. He bore down into them as he challenged her to take
control of his thoughts once more. Whether with this sword or without it, he vowed never
to lose such a battle of wills in the future. He was unprepared for this first meeting. It
would never, ever happen again.
The woman still wished only to escape. She tried to turn and run in the opposite
direction. Again, she found the delver swooping down in her path.
Angered further by the vampire’s attempts to run, Ryson jabbed at her arm with the
point of his sword. It barely touched her, did not even break the skin, but she screamed in
agony. The brown coat smoked at the point of contact. She dropped to the ground in a
heap, rolled to her knees and pleaded for him to let her alone.
Ryson did not hesitate in his reply. "I can only do that if you swear on what is left of
your soul that you will not harm another living creature again."
Her head shot up in anguish, surprise. "I can not do that!" If she had been able, tears
would have been streaming down her burnt cheeks, but she had lost that ability. "I have
no control over what I am!"
"But you must honor such a promise." Ryson did not know how he knew that, but he
did. "You will swear to me by the last remnants of your soul, or I will not let you go."
"You would kill me? I know you delver, I have felt your thoughts. You can not kill
me." It was more of a plea than a statement.
"It won't be me that ends your life, I will let the sun take care of that. I will only keep
you here until you swear."
"But I must do what I must do. I could no more cease tasting blood than you could
stop taking breaths of the air."
"I'm not giving you a choice. Swear or face the sun."
The vampire's words screeched from her mouth fast and wailing. "Let me at least stalk
the animals. I will avoid humans and delvers."
"No! Absolutely not! You will harm neither man nor animal, not even the smallest of
rodents."
"I will not survive. You give me no choice."
"Then take the sun," Ryson stated with cold indifference to the vampire's plight.
The woman shook uncontrollably. She searched the night, but found no hope. She
made one last plea. "Give me at least the creatures that would also prey upon your kind.
Allow me to stalk the shags, the river rogues, the goblins."
Ryson hesitated. He did not respond.
The woman took this as a sign of hope and seized upon it. "You must allow me at
least that. These are creatures that are aligned against delvers. They would not think twice
in slaughtering the helpless. I would be doing you a service." She paused but for a
second, then spoke up in a clear voice before Ryson could deny her. "I swear by my soul
I will only stalk shags, goblins and river rogues. The rest I will leave unharmed."
She waited.
Ryson heaved a heavy breath and finally nodded. He returned his blade to his sheath.
She rose with a contemptuous expression. She showed no gratitude. She grimaced
with anger and disgust. "May the wicked feed on your bones, and may your soul be cast
into the void." She spat.
Ryson shrugged. Then, he remembered the tracker. He looked to his pale lifeless
body.
"What of him?"
"His fate is sealed." Satisfaction pursed her lips. "If I'm lucky, he will see to your
end."
Ryson ignored her. "He's not turned yet. He's just a corpse."
"That will change in three nights from now."
"No, it won't," Ryson answered with a determined edge.
The vampire eyed him suspiciously as he walked over to the prone body. She hissed
as the blade of the Sword of Decree was again free from its sheath. She held her hand up
to her face to block the light but peered through her fingers to witness the delver's
movements.
Ryson took a deep breath, steadied himself, and with one thrust, pierced the still heart
of the tracker. He removed the blade as quickly as he plunged it downward, wiped it
clean on the clothes of the tracker and returned it to its sheath.
"You killed him!" the woman condemned as she lowered her hands.
"No, you killed him," Ryson said flatly. "I saved his soul. Now he will remain nothing
more than a corpse. I would have asked him to do the same for me."
The woman hissed and then fled.
Ryson took the time to bury the tracker. Evan Chase would not rise again.


"What's your business here?" Surliness and suspicion filled the guard’s voice. He
stood in front of Ryson, menacingly blocking passage of the main road into Burbon. He
was only slightly taller than the delver, but much thicker. The density of his biceps,
forearms and wrists gave his arms a short and stubby appearance, a dimension that
contrasted sharply with the long, narrow spear held tightly in his hand. His nose was
large, puffy, and bent slightly to one side, the obvious result of one too many breaks. His
eyes narrowed as he glared, but he could not hide the blood shot corners.
The guard’s position of challenge did more to provoke the delver than frighten him.
Ryson wanted to know why he was being questioned. There had been no guards at this
post during his first trip into Burbon back when he was just investigating damage done by
the quake. He didn't appreciate the guard’s tone or the disapproving stare. And he didn't
like having his passage blocked. No delver would. Impeding his freedom of passage was
like removing his right to think. As to the guard’s hulking physique, such attributes meant
little to a delver. Ryson could run circles around him, turn him into a plodding buffoon
grasping at air if he so desired.
As Ryson was about to protest, probably vehemently, he noted other guards closing
upon him. He immediately sensed their fear and mistrust. Two joined the first guard's
side and formed a semicircle around him. Three others took strategic positions farther
back and along the side of the road. They all appeared weary as well as suspicious, and
they all carried long sharp spears that they were prepared to use.
The jagged edges glistened of polished metal, but the points were smudged with a
damp greasy substance. Ryson had heard of dreadful wars where men carried spears
greased at the point with tar coated poisons. These guards were obviously also familiar
with such tactics, for there was no other reason to grease a spear tip if not to hold poison
fast to its razor sharp blade.
He didn't believe the guards were skilled enough to hit him, but one might just get
lucky. In truth, the odds against such a strike were astronomical. With a poison tipped
spear, however, the slightest graze against his skin might be fatal.
He felt the pull of the Sword of Decree at his side. It reminded him not of the
existence of a weapon so close to his hand but of its importance as stated by Mappel. It
also reminded him of what was still left to accomplish. His mission was near complete.
He needed only to return the sword to the elder elf, a deed he could complete with near
mindless ease. Such a revelation narrowed his own options. It would be foolish to take
even the smallest risk at this point, so he bit down on his anger and swallowed it like
loose spit. He appeared to cooperate, giving a smile rather than a sneer. He rubbed his
hands together then clasped them up by his chest, keeping them well away from the hilt
of the sword.
"My name's Ryson Acumen. I was here several days ago. I'm from Connel. I was sent
to check on the damage done by the quake and to see if you needed any assistance from
our town. Maybe you remember me?"
"I don't." The guard continued to glower. "That explains what you were doing here
then. It doesn't tell me what you want now."
Ryson raised an eyebrow. "Now? Now, I'm back to see how things are going. I spoke
to your Mayor Stevens last time, a tall thin man, brown hair, gray around the edges. I
wanted to check with him again, make sure that he received everything he needed."
Ryson had hoped if he described the mayor it might reduce the strain still apparent in
the guard's tight jaw. It did not. If anything, the guard's scowl deepened.
"The mayor's no longer in charge here. The captain of the guard is." The guard spoke
bluntly as if he didn't care how his statement sounded. "If that's the extent of your
business, you may as well head back to Connel right now."
The last was given in the clear tone of an order.
Ryson held up his hand asking for another moment. This turn of events immediately
interested the delver. He wondered what might have transpired to cause such an event as
the guard taking control of the town. Rather than turn away and make an immediate
heading toward Connel, Ryson persisted with his hopes to gain entry into Burbon. "I am
also here to take a rest from my travels. I've been as far as Pinesway these past few days."
Eager curiosity filled the face of the guard to Ryson's left. He could not keep himself
from interrupting.
"You've been to Pinesway? What is the news there?"
The head guard spoke sternly and rebuked his subordinate. "Keep it quiet. That's not
our concern."
"But I have a brother stationed there."
"It's all right," Ryson stated quietly. He was carefully piecing together the most
obvious of the clues. He turned them into an image of what he was facing and how he
might turn the encounter to his advantage. The existence of guards at the town's main
road, as well as their poisoned tips spears, indicated they were at least slightly aware of
the changes taking place around them. Little else would justify the unseating of the
mayor and the need for stationed guards.
By their own faces, he was certain they must have experienced something of this
madness first hand. Their bloodshot eyes and obvious weariness indicated little sleep
over the past two or three days. Perhaps, mountain shags or goblins had ransacked part of
their town, or perhaps they were hunting a vampire or a river rogue. It was difficult to
distinguish which might have installed their apprehension to wayward travelers, but it
was a safe bet it was connected to the magic.
Ryson decided to deal with their anxieties directly, although somewhat discreetly, and
he lowered his voice to a whisper. "I understand your caution. Like I said, I've been
traveling these past few days. I've seen many strange things. Things I can't understand, or
even wish to."
"What is it you saw?" the head guard demanded sternly, more interested in the
stranger's sightings than in the state of Pinesway.
Ryson could not as of yet determine what exactly had the guards, the whole town, so
unnerved. Thus, he did not wish to speak in detail. If the guards had a run in with shags,
they might interpret the description of the undead as the ramblings of a lunatic. He played
out his hand cautiously, acting as if speaking too much might bring a return of the
insanity. "I really don't like to talk about it. I even wonder about my own eyes, hoped that
it was the fading sun playing tricks on me. But whatever it was, it left me wanting to
return to the safety of a town as soon as possible."
The head guard continued to size up the delver. He frowned, unsatisfied with Ryson's
response.
Ryson sensed his growing impatience. He spoke with as much detail as possible
without alluding to one particular monster. "What I saw, I saw in the shadows. It did not
appear human. It left me cold and I do not like to talk about it." He felt that would suffice
whether the town suffered at the hands of the goblins, the shags or any other dark
creature. He then turned his attention to the guard with a brother in Pinesway. "I can
assure you, however, that when I left Pinesway, it remained intact with the townspeople
still in charge. There was no sign of any damage other than the quake, and I heard
nothing of casualties to the town guard."
The news appeared to settle all of the guards, but they still made no sign of allowing
Ryson to pass. He decided to press the issue.
"I've told you all I know, even things I didn't wish to. For now, I hope you will let me
visit one of your fine taverns. I was hoping to obtain an ale and some food before
returning to Connel. Surely, you would not deny me that. I only hope to add to the
pockets of your own merchants; yours as well for keeping this town, and myself for that
matter, safe while I'm here." He carefully pulled coins from his right front pocket. He did
so slowly, allowing the guards to watch his every move. He handed gold to the guard in
his path, silver to those on his sides. He even flipped coppers to the guards in the back.
"Hopefully, you'll see that as my thanks for keeping this town safe. I will eat easier
and I'll leave as soon as I have eaten."
The guard in front of him looked at the coin in his hand. His face softened. "Stay the
night. It's not friends from Connel that worries us," he said surprisingly. "If you wish to
return to Connel, you can leave in the morning. That way you'll reach it before night falls.
No sense in traveling at night if you don't have to."
Ryson was about to reveal that he was a delver and his speed would allow him to
reach Connel before this day ended. Before he muttered a single word, though, he
changed his mind. He wasn't certain how they would react. He had come across many
humans that mistrusted delvers. The guards were somewhat friendly to him at this
juncture. Right now, he was nothing more than a traveler from Connel, not a delver out
poking around. No sense in changing that, and perhaps invoking a change of heart as
well.
"Very well then, thank you. I need the rest."
Ryson had no real intention of resting. Once he obtained entry into Burbon, he would
look around with a curious eye, try and determine the problems which led to stationing
guards on the roads and relieving the mayor of his duty. Before, he could take a step,
however, the head guard addressed him with more than a hint of authority, as if a captain
speaking to a private.
"I suggest you keep that handy." The guard nodded to the jeweled handled sword at
Ryson's side. "The nights have gotten pretty strange around here. We're doing the best we
can, but we can always use extra help. If we call for you, we'll expect you to lend a
hand."
"Certainly." It now became clear why the guard was allowing Ryson to enter as well
as stay the night. He was as anxious as the others, worried that their numbers were too
small to handle whatever it was they faced. He saw Ryson as another man to be drafted
into his army.
"Don't disappoint us," he said sternly. "And don't go bothering the Captain about
anything. He has enough to worry about. Remember, the mayor's gone. If you had any
business with him, it's finished now."
"Understood," Ryson said plainly.
He stepped around the head guard, who did not move, and walked deliberately but
slowly toward the collection of buildings and houses which made up the heart of Burbon.
He felt their eyes on his back, but he did not turn. He stepped as if nothing more than the
burdens of travel wore upon his shoulders. He heard one of the guards mutter, but could
not make out the words. He sensed another following, but again he showed no concern or
even acknowledgment. The guard would remain far behind, but within view to see which
inn Ryson would select. It seemed obvious they were intent on knowing where he would
be if and when they wanted him to lend a hand.
He forced the thought of the follower from his mind. He concentrated on the town
itself. The roads formed neat rows of parallel and perpendicular lines. Some were
comprised of stone, some of pitch, and some only of dirt. Everything was straight and
organized, though, and he could find not a single curve in any of the streets or alleys.
The buildings matched the symmetry of the roads they lined. Whether private home or
merchant shop, inn or church, every structure stood evenly spaced apart and an equal
distance from the road. Signs were simple and to the point. Nothing lavish stood apart
from the rest. Even the noisiest tavern appeared to conform to the building standards of
every other surrounding structure. Stone walks and paths marked direct lanes to doors or
to neighboring properties. Each corner was marked with a lamp post. Glass covered
lamps remained dormant in the afternoon sun. Ryson bet they were lit at the same time by
the same person every evening. He had seen these sights before during his first trip to
Burbon, but never really noticed the regimented consistency, the hard-lined conformity.
"It's no wonder the guard took over," Ryson muttered to himself as he passed
buildings which now all melded together. "They like things steady here. I wonder how
they're going to react to the return of the magic."
"Excuse me?" A passerby overheard him and shot a questioning glance. He looked to
be nothing more than a merchant carrying his receipts to the bank, but he now wore an
expression of dissatisfaction.
Ryson nodded his head in acknowledgment of the newcomer. He spoke with calm
assurance. "Good day, sir. I'm looking for a tavern or an inn. I'm hoping to find one with
a show, music, magic, anything. It's been a hard day. I could stand with a little humor.
Anything, you can recommend?"
The look of dissatisfaction turned to confusion. The merchant thought he heard the
stranger clearly speak of the return of magic, but now he was not so sure. He conceded he
might have misunderstood, but made no apology. "The Borderline has a string quartet.
Down the block." He pointed then turned quickly. He obviously wanted nothing more to
do with the stranger.
"Thank you," Ryson said to the merchant's back. When he was clear of being
overheard, he again spoke only to himself, this time in a whisper. "I won't allow that to
happen again."
Out of the corner of his eye, he picked up the guard which continued to follow him. "I
might as well put an end to this, too."
Ryson picked up his pace as if the merchant's directions assisted him on his way.
Brisk steps carried him quickly to the front of the Borderline Inn. Soft, but uplifting
music wafted from the open front window. His ears tuned to it quickly.
"Two guitars, a cello, and a double bass," he stated with confidence as he walked
through the door.
The sight of the quartet in the far corner confirmed what his ears already told him.
Four musicians worked effortlessly on the instruments Ryson named before entering.
They played by memory, for no sheets of music appeared before them. Ryson guessed all
but one of the guitar players had been together for many years. Their hands flowed over
their instruments with nary a glance from one to another. Only the second guitar watched
the others for cues in tempo. The other three played as if guided by the same hand, an
ability which reminded the delver of the algors.
The current musical selection filled the room with comforting ease. It blessed the air
with inspiration, no where near as gay as a march, but uplifting enough for all to feel they
could face their troubles, or at least forget them. Such melodies would continue
throughout the afternoon and into the evening. Not a single song of melancholy would
escape these instruments on this day.
The tavern was about one third full. A whisper of conversation hung in the air, but for
the most part, the patrons remained quiet. Their intention was clearly upon allowing the
cheerful music to wash the anxiety from their minds.
Ryson moved to a small table roughly four steps from a long bar. A young female
barkeep gave him a smile from behind it. He nodded and returned the smile. Rather than
take the seat at the table, he moved to the bar.
She threw a towel over her arm as he placed himself upon a stool. When he carefully
moved the end of the sheathed sword to keep it from striking the bar, she appeared even
more grateful for his appearance. She stepped up to his place and quickly wiped the bar
surface with the towel before replacing it over her arm.
"What would you like?" her eyes grabbed his. Medium length black hair hung freely
about her shoulders. Bangs covered her forehead and kept attention on her hazel eyes.
"I'll have an ale please."
"Dark or light?"
"I think I'll stick with light," he grinned.
She bit her lip gently, still grinning, and nodded. She whisked about gracefully. With
fluid movements, a tall glass was soon leaning under a flowing tap. With a rap of her
elbow on the lever, the flow ceased just as the light golden liquid reached the rim. She
placed it in front of him with another smile.
By then, Ryson had a gold coin in his hand. He slid it toward her. "That's for you, not
for the ale. I'd like to run a tab for that. I think I'm going to be here a while."
"Certainly," the barmaid was obviously happy with this news.
"Do you have any stew?"
"Vegetable. Potatoes, carrots, celery and onions."
"That'll be fine. I also need a room. Who would I see about that?"
"I can take care of that. There are plenty of them available. I'll have a key and number
for you before you're done with your supper."
"Great. Thank you ... uh ..." He paused, waiting for her to reveal her name without
him having to ask. She did not hesitate.
"Linda."
"Thank you Linda. I'm Ryson, Ryson Acumen." He held out his hand which she took
with a gentle shake.
"Nice to meet you." She paused, seemed to hesitate. She wanted to speak but she held
her tongue.
Ryson picked it up immediately. "What would you like to know?" His tone contained
warmth and invited her to speak freely.
"I couldn't help notice your sword. Are you here to help the guard?"
"Actually, I was here to see how you were all recovering from the quake. But it seems
as if that's old news and the least of all our problems." His expression was a knowing one,
one which indicated he was aware of the madness which was now creeping into this
border town. "I spoke with the guards, though, and they mentioned they might need all
the help they can get. I didn't protest."
The smile lingered on her lips. "So you will help?"
"I'll help as long as I'm here."
"How long might that be?" Her eyes widened with hope and curiosity.
"For today and this evening. I have to return to Connel tomorrow morning."
The smile disappeared, and the delver was sad to see it go. She sighed and turned to
leave. "I'll get you your stew and see about your room then."
For some reason he felt the need to explain, the need to bring back the smile to her
face. She had shown him a moment of kindness. He did not want to accept that kindness
under false pretenses, did not care to perpetuate the secrecy he had kept upon entering her
town. He needed to open up to her, to tell her more than he had told the guard. He
reached out with delver swiftness and gently took her arm just above the wrist.
She looked back at him with surprise, but not with aversion. She made no attempt to
remove his hand. She only waited for an explanation.
"Before you go and get me that room," he whispered, "there's something I should tell
you which I didn't tell the guards." He looked about before continuing to ensure no one
was paying attention to them. No one was. "I'm a delver."
She looked at him with a bewildered expression, as if the statement meant nothing to
her.
He continued to explain. "I'm full bred. I've been through the forests, the desert, and
the hills west of here. I've seen some things which I never would have expected to see in
my life."
The smile didn't quite return, but something akin to compassion filled her eyes and her
expression. "We've all seen or heard strange things lately. As for you being a delver, that
means little here, at least to most of us. It's not the delvers we're worried about."
"What is it you're worried about?" he continued whispering, but his tone contained the
seriousness of his intentions. "I've seen different things in the past few days, things that
almost defy explanation. I know your town must be facing something of that sort, but I
don't know what."
It was Linda's turn to see if anyone was watching them. She noticed a man at the end
of the bar finishing a brandy. He looked up and spotted her. He waved for another round.
"I'll be right back." She slid her arm away from his, almost reluctantly, and tended to
the patron. She returned quickly.
"I don't know what it is you've seen," she began, "but I know what I have." She
hesitated, as if she knew he would not believe what she was about to say. She spoke of it
regardless. "Little creatures, little monsters with crossbows. I saw them myself. They
came into town just after sunset. It was still just light enough to see them. They came in
and attacked the general store at the northern edge of town. They took all the food and
weapons they could lay their hands on. No one was ready for them. They were in and
gone in an instant. But a lot of us saw them. At first the mayor didn't believe the story,
said it was a hoax. They came back again the next night. The captain of the guard took
over after that. We've seen them again but they ran from the guards."
"Goblins," Ryson stated simply.
"Excuse me?"
"They're called goblins." He searched for better words, words to help her understand,
but none existed. He considered the best way for him to explain his knowledge. "You
don't have a Church of Godson here, do you?"
She shook her head.
It did not surprise Ryson. A town like this one, a town of order, wouldn't have much
patience for followers of Godson. He tried to explain the best he could without a familiar
reference point.
"The legends, the Book of Godson, they talk about creatures that used to walk the
land. The goblins are one of those creatures. Apparently, they're back."
"You can't be serious?"
Ryson took no offense. He spoke calmly and rationally and pointed out the underlying
frankness of the situation. "Are you serious about what you saw? Little creatures with
crossbows? I can describe them for you as well. They had puffy swollen faces and large
eyes. They wore breastplates of some kind of armor. They were mostly bald but had
wisps of hair."
"You've seen them, too."
"They're goblins," he repeated patiently. "And I've seen them in Dark Spruce Forest."
"Why are they here?" Linda demanded pleadingly.
Ryson considered telling her of his meeting with the elves and of the sphere. He
wished to continue the pure openness of the conversation. These fleeting moments had a
cleansing effect upon his mind and his soul, as if finally speaking the details of his
journey was proof enough they truly occurred.
He stopped himself, however, and did not speak of the sphere. It was not time, not yet.
This poor woman, the entire town for that matter, was not prepared for such sudden
changes. If the goblins had sent them into turmoil, what would knowledge of the sphere
do for them?
He spoke honestly, but as he refrained from telling the guards of his heritage, he
stopped short of mentioning the sphere of Ingar. "I assume they're here to steal supplies
from your town. They appeared disorganized when I stumbled upon them in the forest. I
know that doesn't tell you much but I have as many questions as you do. Right now, I'm
just trying to make it through one mystery at a time. I know now that I have to return to
Connel tomorrow. One of the oldest Godson churches is there. Hopefully, I'll find out
more when I get there."
He stopped and waited. She seemed to want to ask more questions, but could not find
how to pose them. He decided to place her attention back on himself and away from the
goblins. "Anyway, I thought you should know that I'm a delver and what I've been
through before you decided to get me a room. If you want, I'll leave now."
"No, I want you to stay," she responded firmly. Her eyes revealed a strength that even
surpassed her tone. "I'll get you your stew. We do need all the help we can get, even if
it’s just for one night."
Ryson bid her to stay for one more moment. "I have to ask you one more favor. Keep
what I've said between the two of us. I don't want the guards to think I was lying to them.
I just didn't know how they would react to me being a delver. I would also rather not have
to answer questions about goblins just yet. I need to find out more for myself. I really
don't have all the answers."
The smile finally returned fully to Linda's lips. It made it clear to Ryson that he could
trust her. "I won't tell anyone. I know a little about delvers. They want to know
everything they can about just about everything. Others know that, too. If word gets out,
the captain may question you. It wouldn't be bad, but it might delay you. I doubt that
would help you."
"You understand the situation very well," he complimented. "Time may or may not be
important. I'm not sure, but I do get a little anxious when someone holds me up."
"I understand that, too." Her smile grew. "With that thought, let me get you that stew."
The stew was hot and fresh. The vegetables were probably up from the south where
they were already harvesting the first rewards from an early planting. Only some of the
potatoes tasted as if they were taken from a long season of cold storage. The bowl went
down quick and he asked for a second with a slice of fresh bread.
The rest of that afternoon was spent in casual conversation with Linda, listening to the
news from those who entered, or simply listening to the music. Ryson realized that he
direly needed this moment of calm, far more than he needed sleep in fact. He had slept on
his journey, but he never truly relaxed. Every moment was spent on guard. In this
pleasant inn, he could finally afford to drop that guard. His tensed muscles eased slowly
but surely. The ever present watchfulness evaporated, though not easily and not at first.
The first few times the door swung open, it jerked at his attention. He almost expected
to see a band of goblins or a mountain shag barge inward, but only tired townsfolk
stepped into the room. As time passed, the opening of the door would not even call for
his glance.
He allowed his weight to sink into the soft cushions of the stool. His arms rested upon
the bar top. He gladly told Linda stories of his adventures, but not the most recent. He
kept his stories to the times before the quake, before everything had changed. He told her
of exploring the hills northeast of Connel, the caves he found. She listened with genuine
interest and asked many questions of why he did what he did.
They kept the conversation between themselves. For the most part, the other patrons
let them be, except for when their glasses ran dry. Most knew Linda and were pleased to
see her speaking with a young man. They also spied Ryson's sword. They were pleased to
see that as well. The townsfolk carried no arms themselves for that was the job of the
guard in this disciplined town. But they were all apparently aware of the raids and were
relieved to see someone in their midst who appeared able to protect them.
Night crept across the town. More lamps and a fire in the stone hearth were lit. More
and more people filled into the room. Obviously, they didn't like being alone the darker it
became. Soon, even the free space offered to Ryson was needed, and he and Linda had to
give up their privacy. They would no longer talk about delvers or explorations. They
barely talked at all for Linda was now almost constantly busy, even with the help of
newly arrived serving maids and lads.
She was able to manage one small moment to whisper a request of her own to Ryson.
"I may not get a chance to talk to you again before you leave tomorrow, but I'd like to ask
something of you. After you go to Connel and find out what you can, I have a favor.
When you've learned all you can, come back here and tell me what's really going on. I
know it may take you a while, I don't expect you to be back in a day or maybe even a
season, but I would like you to come back. I'll still be here. And I'll want to know what
you found out."
"Agreed," Ryson said with a smile of his own.
She brushed his arm and expressed her gratitude with a smile that Ryson was now
accustomed. She walked away reluctantly to the calls of patrons at the other end of the
bar.
Ryson watched her move away for only a moment, before his attention was ripped
from the barmaid with the ringing alarm of his own instincts. He jerked his head upward,
sat erect in his chair lifting his ear to the highest point. He directed it toward the front of
the inn. He focused his concentration on ignoring the din of the patrons around him and
picking up every sound beyond the walls.
"Godson!" he muttered almost angrily.
The rest of the patrons went about their business. The talk was louder now, forcing the
musicians to increase their own volume. All attention was on the business of the room.
No one looked to the doors or to the windows. Their troubles were forgotten as they were
together. Drinking, eating and speaking with friends and neighbors, they forced the recent
misfortunes from their forethought.
Ryson maintained his position for a moment more. His eyes bore a hole through the
door. His ears continued to sift through the clamor to pick out every vibration which
warned him of danger. With a deep breath, he leapt from his stool.
Only a few noticed him at first, but all eyes were on him when he demanded the
musicians cease their playing. As they conceded and the crowd grew to a silence, the
reasons for his actions were now clear to all. The attention of every patron and every
servant flew from Ryson to the door and windows.
Angry shouts rang out in the streets. They came from every direction, but thankfully, a
distance from the front of the inn they occupied. The closest sounded many blocks away.
Shuffling, running feet echoed in the distance. Orders of command echoed through
otherwise silent streets, silent until a distant response brought a shiver to them all.
Guttural voices answered in concert to the shouts of the guards. They carried contempt in
tone and revealed great numbers.
Ryson recognized the voices and matched it to that of the goblins found at the base of
Sanctum Mountain. They were attacking en masse, using the dark to their advantage.
Their shouts lasted for but a moment, a defiant challenge for the guards to meet them.
Beyond that, they would make no further calls to reveal their position.
Ryson considered what he learned of the goblins from his talks with Lief Woodson. If
the elf's words were true, and Ryson had no reason to doubt them, the goblins would
slaughter all they could lay their hands upon. The delver turned his attention back to the
crowd within the Borderline Inn. He spoke with an iron will.
"Listen to me all of you. Stay calm and you will survive this night. Panic and you
won't." He spoke clearly but quickly. "I'm going out there to see what I can do, only you
can help protect your safety. Dim the lamps but get that fire burning hot."
No one questioned his authority. The sword at his side punctuated his command, and
his orders were carried out without challenge. Linda threw three heavy logs on the fire as
the other servants and a few patrons either extinguished or lowered the flames within the
lamps. The corners of the room grew dark as the blazing fire was now the only true
source of bright light.
Ryson continued giving orders. He pointed to three large men he presumed to be
farmers sitting at the bar. "You three. Break at least three dozen legs off of those bar
stools. Wrap the ends tightly with rags dipped in oil from the lamps. They'll make good
torches. The rest of you move either behind or around the bar. Stay away from the
windows and doors."
Ryson stepped aggressively to the door. His hand was now firmly wrapped about the
hilt of his sword but he kept it sheathed. He opened the door a crack and gazed carefully
outside. With sudden swiftness, he threw open the door. His arm left the door knob and
whisked outside. In a blur, he had a hold of a confused, frightened woman and yanked
her inside.
"It's alright," he comforted her as he directed her toward the others inside and shut the
door behind her.
As he continued with his ear pressed upon the door and an eye upon a neighboring
window, every person within the tavern followed his instructions. Soon the torches were
constructed and the people were huddled in the center of the room.
Ryson looked back to them and gave his final commands. "Light two of the torches.
Keep the rest ready by the fire. I want you two men at the door with the two lit torches.
When the rags start to disintegrate, throw them back in the fire and light two more. Keep
someone near each window but stay to the side and don't make a target of yourself. And
watch for breaking glass. If something tries to get in, call for a torch and burn it. Keep the
front door closed but unlocked. If you see one of your own running through the streets,
get them inside quick. If something else tries to get in, put a torch in its face. You'll know
what your enemy is when you see it. I'll try to keep an eye on this place, but I have to
help outside. Your safety is as much in your own hands as anyone else's."
"We'll be alright," Linda called out, but she could not hide the look of concern for
herself, for those around her, or for Ryson.
He nodded, opened the door, and leapt outside. The door shut behind him.
Once clear of the front of the tavern, Ryson crouched and surveyed the area. He
quickly located a dark spot near a corner alley away from any lamp post. He moved to it
in a heartbeat where he could use his night vision to assess the raid.
At the center of town and toward the east, the lamp lights remained lit, but many
others at the western edge of town were now out. Darkness seemed to swallow an entire
section of buildings. Shouts of the guard were replaced with shrieks of pain. Soon silence
enveloped the area as much as the growing darkness. Shrouded rustling was now the only
sound he could detect in that direction.
Orders of other guards could still be heard at the opposite side of town. They were
moving closer to confront the sizable band of invaders, but they were moving slowly,
cautiously.
Another light to the west was extinguished. The goblins were quite aware that the
guards would have difficulty seeing in the dark. They were extinguishing the lamp lights
systematically, probably sending out forward observers to handle the task while groups of
others hid in the shadows with crossbows loaded.
Ryson gave another heed to the slowly approaching guard. He gauged their distance
and speed and compared it to the closing edge of the darkness. The goblins would reach
the inn before the guard. They would see the fire within and move to extinguish it.
Ryson bit down hard on his lip, almost drawing blood. He looked down at the sword,
the hilt still in his grasp. "It'll give off a beacon every goblin within the town will see," he
grumbled. His hand released the handle and shot into his bag. He pulled out a rope and
his knife. The knife went into its familiar spot between his teeth. The rope stayed in his
hand. He darted towards the darkness.
With great care, the delver set about his initial task of locating the closest goblins, the
ones responsible for extinguishing the lamp lights. He spotted them quickly after but four
blocks. They moved with precision as they extinguished one lamp light after another.
Moving in pairs, they climbed the posts using themselves as ladders. They were nothing
if not efficient in this task, but they also seemed most absorbed by it. Their focus fixed
solidly on this single objective and they paid little attention to anything else going on
around them.
Moving within the shadows, staying out of any light, Ryson used his superior vision to
pick and choose a path that led him around the lead goblins. Ryson passed them with
ease, noting their single-mindedness of purpose. He wondered if any goblin could carry
out more than one task at a time.
Once beyond the border of light and dark, Ryson moved with greater care. He sniffed
the air, listened to the late night breeze before venturing around a corner or passing an
intersection of roads. In but a few steps, he located a secondary group of foes, a handful
of goblins a block behind the point.
He counted four, crouching in the darkness at the side of the road. They waited
impatiently for the lead goblins to accomplish their tasks before they would venture
forward. These creatures used the vanishing light as their cue. Their crossbows draped
across their arms in firing position, they moved in concert. They noted movements in
darkened buildings, obviously frightened townsfolk trapped in their homes that darkened
their own lights hoping to be overlooked. For now, the goblins passed them. It was their
mission to eliminate the guards first. If there was time, they would return to take care of
the helpless and unarmed.
Ryson let the goblins pass before taking a position directly behind them. He stopped
when they stopped, waited when they waited. When they moved again, he was on them.
The rope he held was short, but long enough for him to wrap around three before they
even knew he was there. He pulled on it, hard. All three fell to the ground. Their cross
bows dropped from their hands. One went off when it hit the ground. The short bolt
sliced the air but harmlessly plunged into the side of a building. The other two remained
cocked, but the bolts fell out of their firing position.
Ryson took both ends of the rope in one hand and held firmly as he set upon the fourth
goblin. The rope pulled and dragged the first three, keeping them off balance and
helpless. Their groaning alerted the only free goblin within their midst. It turned to face
its attacker, but its crossbow was knocked from its hands by a swift kick before it even
saw Ryson's face.
The dagger stayed in Ryson's teeth as his free hand slashed through the air to the
goblins belt. He had the handle of the short sword before the goblin moved its arm.
Showing only slight compassion, Ryson swung the flat part of the blade down upon the
goblins head. It struck with a resounding thud, but made no cut in the scalp. The creature
would live, but hopefully within the confinement of cells and under the watchful eyes of
the town guard.
Ryson turned to the other three and knocked them upon their heads equally as hard.
Only one was able to draw his sword in time, but the goblin was no match for the delver's
speed and agility.
Ryson turned an ear to the heavy darkness off to the west. The clamor of the scuffle
obviously alerted a larger party of goblins. He could hear them moving up fast, probably
expecting to meet with the main body of the human guard.
For now, the delver ignored them. He spun towards the goblins at the point who were
now working on yet another lamp. They were too busy to notice what was going on
behind them. Ryson ran toward them at top speed. The short sword remained in his hand
just as the dagger remained in his clenched teeth.
One was leaning against the post standing on the other's shoulders when he reached
them. He grabbed the higher goblin in one hand and tossed him like a handful of hay. It
hit the ground in a heap, rolled over with a groan, then went silent.
With glaring eyes Ryson brandished the newly acquired short sword at the second
goblin's throat.
The goblin backed against the post. Its small puffy hands seemed to tremble in
indecision.
With his free hand, Ryson took the dagger from his teeth. With a weapon in both
hands, he stood menacingly over the creature, ready to strike with both blades.
"Don't!" he growled and pointed with his eyes to the sheathed sword at the goblin’s
waist. "Call a retreat," he ordered again.
The goblin did not move.
Ryson instantly recalled his first encounter with goblins. He remembered how the
mention of his name appeared to stir a reaction as well as compliance from that goblin,
and he spoke with blood-boiling anger. "My name is Ryson Acumen. I'm a delver and
you won't escape. I'll see to that."
The goblins eyes widened ever so slightly. He looked down the road toward the
approaching goblins. They were barely in sight and moving too slow for his liking.
"You will let me go if I do, yes?" the goblin demanded with as much fear as loathing.
Ryson bit back his growing anger. "You, yes. That is if you call for the retreat right
now. The other one and the four back there are my prisoners. Now call retreat or you
won't be so lucky!"
Without hesitation, the goblin opened its mouth and called out with strange,
unintelligible words.
Ryson kept his attention upon the goblin in front of him but listened for obvious signs
of retreat to the rear. Whatever the goblin said, it clearly sent the desired message. Ryson
heard the distinguishable sounds of scurrying feet. The goblins were moving away fast,
out of the town.
"Now you must let me go," the goblin demanded with a nervous watch upon the two
blades which continued to threaten him.
Ryson sensed the swirling emotions in the goblin. The fear for its own near worthless
life, its lackluster indifference to those it helped kill, and its bubbling desire to strike out
against the delver. All such sentiment was as clear to the Ryson as if it were carved in the
goblin's breast plate. While it did not reach for its sword now, instead waited for the
promised release, it was clear that the goblin would return with malicious intentions.
Ryson thought of the town and Linda. They were lucky he was here this night, but he
would be gone in the morning and unable to protect them. If the goblins returned, many
more would probably die, maybe even Linda.
If he stayed, the Sword of Decree would stay with him. Again, his vow to Mappel
echoed in his ear, this time it mocked him. He had done all that was asked of him. He
assisted Lief in reaching Sanctum and helped bring Shayed's word to Mappel. Even now,
the algors were probably reaching Connel. He need only return this blasted weapon
which he did not want in the first place. It was all that required his departure from
Burbon, but he could not ignore it. He had to leave, yet he had to protect this town as
well.
Ryson turned one option over in his mind. He needed to convince the goblins that
Burbon was not a worthy target for their ill-will, and he had a messenger before him. He
stared deeply into the swollen face of the goblin.
"Before I let you go, I want to know your name."
The goblin sneered, but could not help recoil from the delver's searching stare. It
responded with a whining protest. "That was not part of the deal."
Ryson shook his head and exhaled heavily. "That's alright. You don't have to tell me
anything. I know your scent now. I'd be able to find you again if I had to look through a
hundred goblins. But I want you to know that I'll be watching this town. If anything
happens to it, I'm coming after you and you will answer to me. Understand?"
The goblin only spat.
With the swiftest of strikes, he smacked the goblin on the shoulder with the dull edge
of the short sword. The motion was so quick it defied the goblin's vision. It was meant to
punctuate Ryson's own intentions, to prove his words were no idle boast. "Remember
what I said. I'm a delver and I will find you."
The goblin’s expression turned to sullen concern and Ryson believed his words had
found their mark in the goblin's cowardly spirit.
"Move!" Ryson shouted. "Or draw your sword. Take your pick."
The goblin chose the former and sped off into the night.
Ryson watched with grim satisfaction. He truly doubted this goblin would return, and
he could only hope it would convince any others to avoid Burbon as well.
He allowed the fleeing goblin a few moments before addressing other important
matters. He lifted the fallen goblin off the ground and brought it to the other four that
remained unconscious in the road. He tied them all together before leaving them.
With the town still dark, he took the time to make a careful reconnaissance of every
street and every alley in the western part of town. He found the tracks of the goblins and
followed them to ensure they had all left town. None remained. They did, however, leave
their mark.
Ryson found the bodies of eight guards scattered about the streets and alleys that
remained in darkness. None were left alive, though most probably died in slow agony.
The short arrows were not shot to kill immediately. They plunged into the stomach, the
upper shoulders, the thighs and the back. One had as many as a dozen riddled among his
limbs.
Ryson again remembered Lief's words regarding the goblins and his distaste for them.
The elf had warned Ryson that the goblin cared little for the sanctity of life, would not
care for the life of a delver, or apparently a human. The proof was all around him. He
threw the short sword to the ground and finished his reconnaissance.
Satisfied that the immediate danger had ended, the delver returned to the captured
goblins, finding them surrounded by a half dozen guards. Many of the lamps were being
relit and Ryson saw them clearly as he approached.
The guards wore minimal armor and carried spears just as those that stopped him that
same afternoon. One, however, wore a long sword at his side and a vest of red cloth over
his chest plate.
Upon noticing Ryson stepping forward, the guards turned and held their spears with
menace. The man with the sword, though, merely cast a suspicious glance. He called out
with a commanding tone.
"Are you responsible for this?" the question boomed out across the silence.
"I am," Ryson stated simply and continued walking forward as if the spears meant
nothing to him.
"And what of the creatures responsible for the raid?"
"They're called goblins and they're gone," Ryson replied flatly. He walked past more
than one guard, considering them nothing more than gnats buzzing around his ear.
"Stand down your arms!" came an order from the red vested soldier to which the
guards reluctantly adhered.
"You're the captain?" Ryson asked as he now stood in front of him.
"I am. Who might you be?"
"Ryson Acumen."
The captain nodded and looked to the sword which remained sheathed at Ryson's side.
"I was told of your arrival. You're the stranger from Connel. Tell me what happened
here?"
Ryson treated the command as more of a casual request and responded in kind. "Your
men told me this afternoon that they might need my help. I heard the commotion and
simply did what they asked."
The captain shook his head slowly but succinctly. "That's not what I mean and you
know it. I want to know how you were able to capture these goblins and thwart their
attack."
"I'm a delver," Ryson admitted. "I was able to sneak up on the forward attackers
before they saw or heard me. I took them out and forced one to call the retreat."
"Any reason why you didn't reveal that little secret to the guards this afternoon? If you
did, I would've known about it." The captain did not hide his annoyance with this simple
fact.
Ryson revealed his own irritation, which was of a greater degree than that of the
captain's. "And what would you have done if I did tell them?"
"I would have wanted to see you."
"And you would have asked a lot of questions, kept me under wraps until you could
figure out what to do with me. Isn't that right?" The delver's words snapped from his
mouth. It was the tongue lashing he wanted to give to the guard that blocked his passage
earlier that day. He had found the man in charge, the man ultimately responsible for the
stationed guard, and he bore into him. "You probably would have kept me locked up until
you could ask all your mindless questions. Well if I allowed that, I wouldn't have been
able to save you the way I did. You would have all walked right into annihilation."
"Don't tell me what I would and wouldn't do!" the captain started angrily, but Ryson
wouldn't let him finish.
"I'm not going to argue with you," Ryson flashed. "You and I both know what would
have happened. Just be grateful it didn't. You have eight comrades dead back there. I kept
there from being more. Now I've given you four prisoners to question, that should help
you learn how to protect yourselves from these things. And by Godson you better learn. I
gave one of them a warning to leave this town alone. I told it I'd hold it responsible for
anything that happened here. Well now, I'm telling you the same. These things won't go
away just because you want them to. You have to do more than just carry around those
stupid spears. Build walls and gates. Put guards in towers that are able to recognize when
trouble's near."
The captain's eyes blazed with fury. "You dare tell me how to protect this town. I have
served in over ..."
"I don't care what you've done in the past. I know it didn't help those eight men that
are dead back there. Just remember what I said. I'm holding you responsible for the safety
of this town. Now I've done more than my share, so I'm not going to stand here and waste
time with you. I left some people at the Borderline Inn. I'm going back there now. If you
want to join me and see what they say, that's your choice. But if you want to try and stop
me, well good luck. I don't tire easily."
He gave the captain a glaring stare of defiance before walking away. As he did, he
called out one more time to him. "By the way, I'm staying for the night, but I'm leaving
for Connel tomorrow. Don't even think about stopping me. I'll make you look bad."
As Ryson turned back toward the inn, he reigned in his open hostility. He tried to
force the unpleasantness of the evening from his mind. For the moment, the guards let
him be. This allowed him a respite to clear the anger from his thoughts.
As he reflected upon his own actions, he realized how ill-tempered he himself was
becoming. The captain did nothing beyond his own duty and nothing to truly solicit
Ryson's ire, yet Ryson was more than willing to apply a tongue lashing. He had found it
satisfying, and that in itself seemed out of place for his usually good-natured character.
Maybe it was his first encounter with the guard that brought out his hostilities. Maybe it
was the tension created by the drastic changes in the land. Or perhaps the taint of evil in
the magic was now reshaping itself to infect other races as well as the elves.
With this unpleasant thought, Ryson wondered how the taint would eventually destroy
them. Would the poison simply lead to slow agonizing illness and death, or would it
bring insanity? Was this the start of a violent madness which would turn them against
each other? He cursed the sphere, cursed the changes.


Open air. Whether it is in thick forests, tall mountains or the congestion of bustling
human towns, this was not the place for dwarves. Tun and Jon Folarok were
uncomfortable the moment they left the underground city of Dunop with their elfin
escorts. They were as unhappy with the lush cover of Dark Spruce Forest as they were
with the open roads built by the humans. The thickest cluster of intertwining leaves and
branches was no substitute for solid rock.
Dunop rested nearly a league under the surface, a city within the rock, and a home for
countless dwarves. Tunnels served as alleys and streets, hollow caves as homes. Snaking
channels supplied underground water for a myriad of purposes, just as tubular openings
broke through to the surface to supply air and ventilation. A wide open cavern sat in the
middle as the town center. Tunnels of varying heights and widths spiraled outward to the
far edges of this underground city like a massive spider web and formed pathways for all
travel.
Some of the tunnels expanded beyond the borders of the city. Most of these were
isolated byways to neighboring dwarf villages or cities. Only a handful branched beyond
the crust of the land and into open air, and these were seldom used.
There were but two reasons for a dwarf to venture outside the security of their tunnels.
One, to scout the activity of humans digging mine shafts near their underground cities,
and two, to obtain resources which were not available beneath the surface of Uton. They
normally did not gather such necessities themselves, but depended upon trade with the
elves.
The dwarves continued an uneasy but mutually advantageous relationship with the
elves throughout the ages, beyond the time of division. They traded stone for wood, as
well as gems for food. As for the rest of the inhabitants of the outside world, the dwarves
held little care.
Tun and Jon had left Dunop with their elfin escorts after sunset to reduce the pain to
the dwarves' eyes. Neither Jon nor Tun had spent any extended time in daylight and they
were not accustomed for the onslaught of the bright rays into their naturally widened
pupils.
Centuries of cave dwelling, and tunnel travel brought the entire dwarf race the ability
to see in limited illumination. They lived by the light of small fires, and the reflection of
light from the outside world. Strategically placed gems and silver coated mirrors
delivered adequate lighting through the smallest of tunnels and air holes, but it could not
compare to the broad, direct rays of the sun. It would take time for their eyes to adjust.
There were other adjustments to make as well. Their lungs were not used to the high
oxygen content of free air. Taking small breaths and exhaling infrequently, the two
dwarves reduced the lightheadedness that enveloped them as they closed upon Dunop's
exit to the outside. The air of their caves might have seemed stale to the elves, but it was
the air breathed by Tun and Jon for all their lives.
Their leaving was also not done under the best of circumstances. News brought by the
elves was unsettling, bringing a wide array of curses and doubt. The Sphere of Ingar was
never a topic which enthralled the dwarf people and the fact that it was now loose and
endangering the land angered and clouded their thinking. When the elfin representatives
declared that the dwarves were needed to destroy the Sphere of Ingar rather than reentomb it, it simply added to the chaos.
Magic was something the dwarves learned to live without with greater ease than any
other race. They were the most resistant to its forces as well as the least capable of
utilizing it for their own purposes. Even during the times of legend, when sorcerers were
common, there were only a few dwarves with the power to make any true use of the
energy which graced the land. To nearly every dwarf, magic was an aid to the other races,
a detriment to theirs, and a central reason for their bloodiest battles, thus the dwarves
gladly accepted the task of entombing the sphere long ago at the elf Shayed's command.
It was with such vigor, that Sanctum became the nearly impenetrable fortress it now was.
Returning to Sanctum, however, now stirred an eruption of emotion. Those fearing the
sphere argued that the sphere must be dealt with no matter what the cost. If it had to be
destroyed, then so be it. They survived the times of legend when magic was free in the
land, they would learn to do so again.
The separatist dwarves, those fearing the outside world and especially the humans,
insisted there were other things, more dangerous things, to worry about. They insisted the
dwarf people remain out of all external dealings. Let the sphere spit out its tainted magic,
they argued. Better than giving the humans a chance to show how they could use it to
take over what was left of the surface, and perhaps even the underlands.
The royal family of Folarok was as well divided. King Bol and his wife quarreled for
nearly an entire day without settling the matter. Bol sensed a need to assist the elves
while Queen Yave belabored any task which might lead to dwarf involvement in the
affairs of other races. The argument grew heated over the passing time and the elf escorts
were forced to wait as the royal family bickered over what direction to take.
The eldest son, Tun, and heir to the throne, agreed with his mother. The problems of
the outside world, now almost completely manipulated by the humans, were no longer
their concern. How many caverns were lost due to the endless mining operations of the
humans? How many cites did they have to destroy themselves to keep the humans from
uncovering them? All that work was done to keep the existence of the dwarves a secret
from the humans. Now, Mappel of the elves simply expected them to come out of hiding
and make their presence known to all? The idea was simply absurd. The great city of
Morred was reduced to rubble only twelve seasons ago because the humans began to drill
directly over the city center. Was that now done for nothing?
King Bol rebuffed his eldest son. He reminded the brash prince of other
considerations, of the elves, an important ally to the dwarves. Even if the dwarves could
somehow escape the tainted magic, what of their friends? Could they simply allow the
elves to perish? The relationship between the two peoples was as important as any
relations with neighboring cities. Sending assistance was not only a moral obligation, it
was necessary for their very survival. Or, he questioned, did Tun really believe the
dwarves were ready to return to the outside in order to obtain wood for fires and food to
eat?
The younger of Bol's two sons, Jon, attempted to remain a casual observer of the
argument. It was not his place to make such weighty decisions. The throne was not his,
would not be his, and he did not want it.
Unfortunately, Bol always managed to drag Jon into any conflict with Tun. Perhaps he
only sought an ally, for Tun always seemed to take the queen's side and Bol found
himself outnumbered and unable to get in more than two words at a time.
Jon never appreciated his father demanding an opinion of him. He did not wish to be
in conflict with any of them. Over the long years, however, he learned Bol would drive
him incessantly until he spoke his mind. Recently, Jon stopped even trying to refuse. He
no longer wished to deal with the constant prodding, thus he spoke out at the king's first
request. But he also learned to speak with a guarded tongue, with a voice of caution yet
guarded optimism. He would never say that one or the other option was correct. Instead,
he would point to the validity of both arguments and pull a compromise solution out of
his desire to remain as neutral as possible.
Such was his reaction in this case. Based on what was told to them by the elves, he
concluded that both options held little that was good for the dwarf people. Destroying the
sphere meant a return of magic and all the evils that come with it. Ignoring the sphere
meant leaving the elves to die; clearly two propositions where the dwarves would suffer
under each scenario. He could only offer that someone should go speak to Mappel to see
if there was yet a third option.
Bol frowned and Tun glared but neither spoke outwardly against the calm logic of
Jon's words. Bol decided that two dwarves would accompany the elves to see Mappel,
Jon and Tun. The two dwarves grimaced and attempted to sway their father's decision.
Bol would not budge. Such a weighty problem required the future leaders of Dunop's
attention. They would depart immediately.
Upon their leaving, Bol made a jarring quip toward Tun that he should take heed of
his younger brother's wise advice; a common remark that managed to always drive Tun
further from his brother.
Jon groaned silently, hating being placed in such a tense situation. He had no quarrel
with his brother, no desire to compete with him or steal his glory. In fact, his only wish
was to take a position on the board of council for the constant renovation of Dunop's
construction. He had no desire to lead or solve the problems of his people. He clung to
the natural born tendencies of the dwarves, to dig and tunnel through the rock and earth,
to design artful yet practical caverns for all to see and enjoy. For now, though, he
accepted his role and followed the edicts of the king, his father.
Tun and John followed the elves through a seldom used tunnel which led to a long
overgrown section of Dark Spruce. The weeds were high around the opening and only
one nearly invisible trail led deeper into the forest. The two dwarves would be taken
directly to Connel to make up for lost time, but they would bypass the busy roads and all
villages.
They traveled at night through dark pastures and empty fields. Elfin escorts kept bows
ready and watchful eyes for river rogues and shags. The dwarves moved sullenly at the
direction of their escorts. Travel on the first evening stopped just before sunrise as the
dwarves fashioned a trench in a field left to fallow. Both elf and dwarf remained out of
sight during all of daylight.
As the second night fell, they took to travel once more, reaching the outskirts of
Connel almost exactly at midnight. They noted human guards on horseback taking
position at odd places. It would be difficult to sneak around them but not impossible.
They were unaware that these were the men sent out by Consprite to escort them to the
Church of Godson. Through elf cunning, they avoided all contact and brought themselves
to the steps of the church without being seen by a single human.
One of the escort elves rapped on the door lightly to announce their arrival, but did not
wait for anyone inside to answer. He opened the door himself and whisked the entire
party inside.
After brief introductions, the escorts were on their way back to Dark Spruce, and the
newly arrived dwarf princes were directed to a meeting room in the basement of the
church.
The two dwarves found it quite comfortable in this room. A stone staircase led straight
down to a vast chamber where walls were comprised of dark gray bricks. Small lamps on
the walls gave enough light to read by, but little more. The air was slightly stale and
musty, very much like the air of their home. The heels of their boots clicked against the
granite floor. There was not a single window to be found. Accept for the large oak door at
the top of the stairs, the room was completely enclosed. It gave the dwarves a sense of
security they had longed for since leaving the tunnels of Dunop.
The room contained several long wooden tables, not as sturdy as the oak door, but
sufficient to hold the meals for many hungry men and women. Long benches rested at
opposite sides. Most were empty accept for those about a table at the head of the room.
There sat four; Mappel and Lief, the interpreter Stephen Clarin, and the Reader Matthew.
They all watched the two newcomers approach. Mappel and Lief simply nodded.
Stephen showed slightly greater interest, but the reader stared in wide-eyed wonder.
The two men that approached their table would barely reach the top of Matthew's
chest, but their shoulders were wider than any other here. Jon and Tun both wore long
beards which hung from their chiseled features. The hair on their heads also draped long
past their shoulders. Tun's was as dark as coal, while Jon's contained slivers of gray.
Though younger than Tun, Jon allowed the tensions within his family to take their toll
upon him, and thus, streak his hair with silver markers of his worry. Both pairs of eyes sat
under bushy eyebrows and wrinkled foreheads, and each had fierce noses. They wore
capes of dark purple and gem encrusted chest plates marked with the family crest. Tun
carried a wide single-bladed maul upon his belt, sharpened by the hardest gems. Jon's
weapon hung less conspicuous, nearly behind his back. It was a dull headed mace, much
smaller than Tun's axe and with no sharp edge.
The two approached slowly while gauging their surroundings as well as those that
watched them. Jon's expression softened at the sight of the elves, but Tun continued to
glare warily at all.
As the two dwarves stepped up to the table, the other four rose to greet them.
Mappel smiled softly as he offered a greeting. "The presence of the two princes warms
my aging heart. I could not have asked for more. It has been a long time since I have seen
either of you. If I recall, Jon had still not grown his beard. I see now that he is graying
before his brother," the elder elf chuckled warmly, for indeed the sight of the princes
offered him great hope. He would not have to waste time speaking with an advisor or
counselor. Their arrival meant the dwarves held no doubts of the severity of the situation.
Time saved. Mappel made dignified introductions, presenting both dwarves to each at the
table.
Lief nodded and bowed slightly to the two brothers. He then returned to his seat upon
the bench. He sat rigid, clearly less comfortable than the dwarves with being in this cave
like atmosphere.
Stephen Clarin smiled deeply at their introduction. A flicker of recognition appeared
in the eye of the interpreter. He was indeed delighted to meet two of the dwarf people,
happier still to find they belonged to the royal family of Folarok, as if that name meant
something to him.
As for Matthew, he gaped with an open mouth at the sight of the dwarves. Short,
sturdy men with gray faces seemingly chiseled in stone. Their arms were scant in length
but thick in muscle. Matthew would not have been surprised if they could dig through
stone with nothing more than their powerful fingers. They spoke with deep but soft
voices which barely echoed off the far corners of this hollow room. He would later learn
that dwarves controlled the pitch of their voice to reduce all echo to a minimum, a quality
absolutely necessary for people that lived in caves. If all the dwarves in Dunop let their
voice echo from the roofs of their cave city, Dunop would crumble within a year upon its
deaf inhabitants.
With the introductions complete, Jon and Tun joined the others on a bench. Tun took
the lead and placed himself down across from Mappel, then directed Jon to take a place
by his left. They sat side by side, but subtly separated from the humans and elves. The
space between the dwarves and the others at the long table was miniscule, but no less
obvious. The underlying message of division was not lost upon Mappel, causing his smile
to fade, but he quickly bit back his own anxieties and addressed the prince with ease of
tongue.
"I hope your travel was without burden," Mappel began but Tun cut him off.
"Our travel is not the point of this meeting," he spoke with the authority of a king, as
if his father had already passed on and it was now his word which was law. "Your
messengers brought disquieting news to Dunop, news I would like explained
immediately."
"Very well," Mappel stated with an even voice. He quickly, but thoroughly, described
the events which led to the calling of this meeting. He began with the quake and Lief's
early suspicions. He noted the arrival of Ryson Acumen into the fold and the journey to
Sanctum, including the meetings with goblins and undead alike. He told the dwarves of
the return of the magic and all it had brought with it. He told them, with gravity edging
his voice, of the appearance of Shayed's spirit at Sanctum. He allowed Lief to tell in exact
words what was spoken. When the younger elf finished the verbatim description of the
event, Mappel cast a cutting stare at the older dwarf.
"It is why this gathering now takes place. In order to follow the instructions of Shayed
every race which played a role in the Wizard War must again come together. To this end,
I have sent word to all the races. Your arrival here is greatly appreciated, but it is also
greatly necessary, as is the presence of everyone at this table. I can not help but feel we
are all being guided by benevolent forces. Otherwise, I would have never dreamed of
such a swift gathering of such needed elements. Sanctum must now be breached by our
own forces. By those that are gathered here now, I believe we are well on our way of
obtaining that goal. We must reach the sphere and destroy it. Otherwise, it will lay waste
to the land."
Tun, who during the dissertation listened intently, but appeared skeptical at many
points, spoke with his heavy doubts dripping from every word.
"You know this for fact?" he asked dubiously.
Mappel took no offense. He answered the question with the calm of an even sea. "It is
fact that the sphere was buried long ago to protect the land and its inhabitants. It is fact
that it is again free. It is as much fact that the taint of poison remains upon the energies
which now flow freely from the sphere over the entire land. Yes, these are facts that can
not be denied."
"But is it a fact that the sphere will obliterate the land? Is it a fact that it must be
destroyed?" Tun continued to question.
"These are the words of Shayed," Mappel spoke in earnest. "They mark the words of
the last soul to speak for every race. We have but no choice to heed her warnings and her
instructions, and to accept them as fact. The sphere must be destroyed."
"Just like that? With or without the consent of others with as much stake as you?"
Lief joined the discourse and he scowled and grumbled with impatience at Tun's
doubts. "You are not being poisoned as we are."
Mappel kept his eyes on Tun but held a hand toward Lief. "The magic will turn the
taint of poison to all races eventually. Debating whom is more at risk is not an issue. It is
true, we all have the same at stake."
"Do we?" Tun raised his voice slightly to accent his disagreement. "Will the return of
pure magic, as you insist is the only solution, benefit all equally? I think not. I think there
are other alternatives we might explore."
"You do not understand." Mappel’s words carried more a plea for comprehension than
any other emotion. "The wisdom of Shayed has made it clear we have no other choice.
The sphere must be destroyed. We must all learn to live with the consequences, for there
is no alternative."
Tun seethed. A storm of anger washed over his cold countenance. "It is you that
doesn't understand. Elves. Humans! You are the most perverse at bending the magic to
your own will. Little do you see how the magic was no more than a curse to my people
before the time of the sphere. We have no great desire to see the return of magic. Elves
and humans, however, will see their ranks of sorcerers and wizards grow. Even the lowly
algor will benefit by generating healers. My people have no such natural tendencies to
gain such benefits."
Mappel refuted the claim, spoke with hardened determination to make the dwarf
prince see the clear logic. "It is not from this standpoint we make this decision. We base
it on the instructions of Shayed, who has always spoken for all."
"She may have spoken for every race, but her spirit is still elf," Tun uttered, not trying
to sound disrespectful but making it clear that he was not convinced. "I do not question
her appearance before Lief Woodson and Ryson Acumen, and be advised this is
something I could do. The return of a spirit so old could have us arguing in itself for days.
I will, however, give you the benefit of this doubt. I believe Shayed spoke upon Sanctum,
but I question her instructions. The destruction of the sphere goes much further than
simply entering Sanctum, something which was never meant to be done. It holds
consequences beyond that. You yourself must admit this act will cause the return of wild
magic back to the land. This is something which affects the lives of my people as the
poison affects yours. The dwarves can not afford to place their very existence in the
hands of others with their own interests at stake."
Mappel held his voice steady. "You must acknowledge that even dwarf scrolls
confirm Shayed's wisdom. Never before were her motives questioned as biased toward
the elves."
"It is not being questioned now," Tun stated roughly. "What is at issue here is the right
of the dwarf people to make decisions for themselves. While you might not wish to
examine what such actions will mean to my people, it is my responsibility. One day I will
be king in Dunop. My people will have to trust in my wisdom and my judgment. Will
they be so willing to cast faith in a dwarf who does not truly care for their well being?"
"Your presence here now attests to your worthiness to be their king. Your concern for
their safety affirms your compassion, just as your desire to seek more attractive options
establishes your sense of duty to all your people. But your unwillingness to accept the
undeniable detracts from all these qualities. As a leader and as an heir to the throne, you
must accept the situation when there is no easy answer, when you must make a difficult
decision and choose the lesser of two evils. You say the return of magic will not benefit
your people. I say the alternative is the extinction of us all, including the dwarves."
"I am not ready to concede that point," Tun responded firmly.
Mappel sighed and looked toward the younger prince.
Jon watched and listened carefully, but he had not yet offered a single opinion. Now,
he avoided the gaze of the elder elf, uncomfortably examining anything else around him.
Mappel would not let him escape. "And what of you, Jon? Do you agree with your
older brother?"
Jon coughed before answering. His voice was steady, not a tremble escaped his lip, his
tone soft and balanced. "I agree with weighing all the options," he said carefully as if his
head waited on a chopping block and the wrong word might lead to the swift swing of a
blade. His brother's stare made it feel as if it was.
Jon continued, avoiding his brother's scowl and maintaining a sweeping view of all the
others at the table. "The emergence of the sphere from Sanctum seems to be a certain
fact. In our travel, I noticed signs I could not ignore. It is also difficult not to simply sense
the change in the air itself. Establishing that the sphere is free from its prison means we
all, every race, now face a great dilemma. The sphere must be dealt with. If the only
alternatives are destroying the sphere or facing extinction, I would have to agree that the
sphere must be destroyed. However, if it is my brother's contention that other possibilities
exist, I would suggest we seek them out and weigh their worth as well."
Mappel found little encouragement in Jon's carefully weighted response. Why could
they not understand that Shayed had stated there was no other option? He wondered how
long they might debate the issue before accepting this one undeniable fact. Such a
thought brought another concern, one he was willing to share with the hesitant dwarves.
"I will remind you that while time has not yet become a factor, it may yet have its
relevance. The taint of poison will eventually cause greater sickness in my people as well
as other races as it attunes to them."
If not a deaf ear, Tun Folarok turned an apathetic one towards Mappel's concern.
"Unless the enemy is at your gate, there is always time to ponder the alternatives."
"Then let us hear some of these alternatives!" Lief demanded emotionally. "Your
brother has admitted the sphere is free, admits something must be done, but offers no
option. What of you? What else can be done?"
"Close the fissure," Tun said bluntly, in blatant rebuff of Lief's outburst.
Mappel interceded and attempted to bring a calm tone back to the debate. "According
to Shayed, the sphere will break free again. You must remember that the sphere has
gained an awareness of its burial. Enclosing the sphere is no longer a viable solution."
"Maybe Shayed is mistaken," Tun argued still glaring at Lief. "How will we know that
simply closing the fissure in the mountain won't suffice unless we try it? If it was
nothing more than a natural occurrence which broke the mountain side, sealing it would
solve the problem. The sphere would remain buried and we would all return to our
normal lives. Would anything be lost in trying?"
"Time," Mappel replied.
"Time may be gained as well. The truth is we have no way of knowing. You are
worried about the poison flowing freely over the land. Sealing the fissure would end that,
at least temporarily, perhaps permanently. Once the opening is sealed, you could station
guards at Sanctum to watch for changes. If you so wish, we could continue these talks
after the fissure is closed in order to discuss how to deal with such matters in the future.
If the energy breaks free again, we will know that the attempt failed, but we will be better
prepared for other options. If the sphere needs to be destroyed, at least we will know we
tried other alternatives first."
"And what if the sphere grows stronger in this time? What if the chance to destroy it
fades as we wait outside?"
"Is that a fact or an assumption?"
"It is an assumption based on fact. The sphere has obviously grown strong enough to
break free this time. A power it did not have when it was first buried. That in itself allows
me to conclude that it is growing stronger as time passes. I also return to the words of
Shayed. She has stated that the sphere is gaining a greater consciousness of its
surroundings. At this time, it may not know we are aware of its freedom and wish to end
its threat to the land. That would be a distinct advantage if we were to make an assault
upon Sanctum. If, however, our first attempt is to simply re-bury the sphere, it may
consider us a threat in the future. The sphere has great power. If it wishes, it could block
us from ever coming close again. We must make our first attempt a successful one. There
is no room for trial and error."
Tun shook his head strenuously. "That is simply more conjecture on your part. Again,
I do not wish to sound as if I'm questioning Shayed. In respect for her contribution to all
the races, I would not do such a thing. I will, however, question your interpretation of all
these events. You are making a large assumption when you state that the sphere may
block us from entering Sanctum if our first attempt is to close the fissure."
Lief spoke again, this time with greater control. "Do you know how difficult it would
be to close that opening? I saw it. Not only is it protected by an invisible barrier,
Sanctum is a mountain of solid rock. This is no mound of dirt or loose gravel. Once
granite is broken, you can't simply stick it back together. The only thing you could
possibly do is fill the opening up with loose debris. What will that accomplish? If the
sphere has the power to break through solid rock, it will surely brush away loose dirt."
Tun grimaced. His face became flushed, but he too maintained a semblance of control.
"First, I am not yet convinced the fissure was caused by the sphere. In fact, I find that
difficult to believe. I will grant that natural tremors are rare for the area of Sanctum's
base, but it is not an impossibility. This may be nothing more than a once in a millennium
occurrence. It may never happen again, ever. Second, I will thank you not to tell dwarves
about their greatest talents. You speak to me as if I know nothing about rock and dirt. I
know more now than you could learn in a dozen of your lifetimes, and I know how long
elves live. My brother is far more interested in these aspects, so I will let him answer if it
is possible to seal the fissure giving it far greater strength than it had before the quake
even occurred."
Jon blinked but did not hesitate in answering. While he found little encouragement in
the subject matter of the sphere, speaking of reconstructing Sanctum allowed him a topic
of comfort. "I believe that any fissure can be sealed effectively. And yes, the structural
integrity can be reinforced to maintain greater stress. As for the seams, they can be sealed
to a point where not even an expert builder could locate them. As for the time ..." he
hesitated as he put a hand to his chin. His gaze coursed the ceiling as he made
calculations in his head. "With skilled dwarves, I doubt time would be a factor at all. If I
had a look at the fissure, I would be able to give an accurate estimate."
"Then, maybe that is our first step." Tun took back the reins of the conversation.
"Escort us to Sanctum. Let us look for ourselves."
"That may be a mistake," Mappel dictated with tenacity. "Countless approaches to
Sanctum may give warning to the sphere. I do not think we can afford to lose the
advantage of surprise."
"You speak as if the sphere is capable of thought," Tun replied almost mockingly.
The flippant tone of the remark was too much for the elder elf to accept. "It is!"
Mappel said with his frustration finally becoming apparent. "I will continue to point to
the words of Shayed until this ceiling falls upon your stubborn head. We can not reentomb the sphere. That course of action is no longer available to us. In her own words,
she stated the sphere must be destroyed. And she also stated that it now has an awareness.
It also has the ability to react, although again by Shayed's admission, its reactions are
slow. We must take advantage of that. Wasted efforts of examining the fissure or closing
the fissure can not, will not, be tolerated. I will send an army of elves to be slaughtered in
Sanctum to destroy the sphere before I allow you to approach the mountain."
Stephen Clarin stood up from the bench before Tun could respond angrily. "Do not
drive us all apart," he stated with an emotional plea. Tears filled his eyes even as a smile
grew upon his lips. His face glowed with an inner joy as if his soul was touched by
singing angels.
His sudden outburst brought the attention of the others upon him. He took the time to
look in each of their faces, all the while he appeared as if listening to some far away
voice. The glow about him grew in its radiance. His smile deepened, a smile of a prophet
touched by God. He could not tremble for such was the power in the revelation before
him. It strengthened him, doubled and re-doubled his faith. He held his shoulders as
broad and erect as the dwarf prince. When he continued to speak, determination as well
as bliss accented each word. "These are the two dwarves I see entering Sanctum. They
will enter with others. I will be there, Lief Woodson will be there and another elf. I see
the name of Ryson Acumen and four others as well. I can not yet identify them, but they
will be there. We will enter Sanctum as instructed by Shayed, enter with the will and the
desire to destroy the sphere."
Silence filled the chamber. Even Tun held his tongue as he examined the interpreter
with a perplexed expression. Indeed, all eyes were now upon Stephen. The joyous glow
surrounded them all now and removed the anger and frustration from each. Mappel found
his voice first.
"You did not speak of this when you first told me of your visions."
"Godson did not make it clear to me until this moment," Stephen responded. "When
the two princes entered this room, the vision began to clear in the back of my mind. I
tried to listen to the conversation, but Godson's word would not be denied. The more I
tried to concentrate on what was being said, the clearer the picture became. I will be
involved as will the others I spoke of, including Tun and Jon Folarok."
"What is this?" Tun asked with only curiosity toning his words. He showed no anger
or irritation at the assumptions of the interpreter.
It was Matthew who responded. "He is graced by Godson, Tun Folarok. He has been
given the gift of foresight as well as insight. He has revealed the secrets of the prophecies
of Godson to us. He is now proving to be a prophet as well."
Tun said nothing. He simply stared at Stephen in wordless wonder. The interpreter
stood with such an expression of pure enlightenment, he doubted anyone could question
anything he said.
Stephen returned the look with tears now rolling down his face. He spoke with a
gentle voice. "I don't expect you to lose your doubts with this revelation, although I have
lost mine. It is the will of Godson you will be convinced, I will simply let it happen. Hold
to your doubts as long as you wish, in the end, you will see the truth."
A response came from across the table but not from the dwarf.
"You're telling him to continue to argue the point even after what you have seen?"
Mappel asked with great surprise.
"He may do as he wishes. I have faith that all will be as I have seen."
Tun finally found his voice. He spoke to the interpreter allowing the greatest degree of
respect yet shown. "You puzzle me interpreter. I almost would like to think this is some
kind of trick, but for some reason I see in your face that it is not. I know of Godson and
the power he has over his followers as well as the very land itself. I will not question that
power, but I will do as you say. I will hold to my doubts. If it will be as you say, I can
only assume there is something left to be done yet to convince me."
Mappel blinked his eyes in bewilderment. He could not fathom what had happened
before him. Even as Stephen returned to his seat, he had no idea of what to say or do
next. Nothing had been settled, but it seemed as if all debate had ended. Stephen had
advised Tun to hold onto his doubts until the dwarf himself had seen clearly to release
them. He looked about the table in confusion.
"What is it we must do to remove your doubts, Tun?" the elf finally asked.
"I don't know," the dwarf responded with less combativeness in his voice. "But I still
hold to them. The return of the magic is very unsettling to me. As such, I will not rush
headlong into any decision which involves destroying the sphere until I am certain that it
our only option."
"If Shayed's word can not convince you of that, I don't know what can. It seems as if
we are at an impasse. Do you suggest we simply wait here until you have a change of
heart?"
"There are others still to arrive. Is that not true?" Jon asked, initiating the conversation
for the first time.
"Yes," Mappel replied. "Ryson Acumen will bring representatives of the algors."
"Ryson Acumen is the delver you spoke of?"
Mappel nodded his head.
"Then I suggest we wait until their arrival. Their input might affect what is to happen
next."
"So you are saying we should just sit here and wait?" Lief now asked incredulously.
"I can not abide by such a waste of time either," Mappel added. He searched
desperately for a way to end the deadlock, a way to bring Tun into the light of
understanding. He grasped upon the symbol of his dilemma. "There are enough gathered
here right now for us to make significant strides to achieving our goals. The secrets of
Sanctum have endured hundreds upon hundreds of seasons. They must now be revealed.
At this moment, we already have the ability to reveal three fifths of the mystery. Perhaps
if I begin by revealing what the elves have placed in Sanctum, I will gain the trust of Tun,
and he will see that ..."
Stephen Clarin stopped him with a wave of his hand. "It is still not yet the time for
that. With the grace of Godson, the algors will be here shortly, and with them, the delver
Acumen. We should wait for their arrival. Let the dwarves listen to the words of Ryson.
He has been at the forefront of all of this. It may be his role to bring them to
understanding."
"I agree," Tun said with a nod. "I do not wish to hear the elf secret of the tiers at this
moment. Such information is dangerous. The arrival of the algors may mean nothing to
us, and I will not so willingly reveal the secret which keep the dwarves safe from evil
magic unless it is as the interpreter says. I will wait for the doubts to be removed from my
mind. For me, that will be the only time I will reveal the dwarf secret of Sanctum."
"Then we have nothing more to do than wait," Mappel said with an almost painful
shrug. He hoped the suggested inactivity might force someone into compromise. Instead,
it allowed the interpreter a moment to make an unsuspected announcement of his own.
"There is something I have to do," Stephen spoke as he stood. "Something has been
nagging at my thoughts which I must see to. It has a lot to do with what is happening
here, but it is not yet clear to me. I have to leave but I will be back shortly."
He left abruptly with no further explanation. Every other pair of eyes watched him
leave.


"It is good to see you safe, Ryson Acumen." Mappel extended a hand. As the delver
responded in kind, the elder elf allowed a small smile to grasp his lips. They stood alone
in Matthew's private chambers. A host of others waited in the basement meeting room,
but Mappel requested they speak alone before the delver was brought before them. It was
the elder elf's wish to explain the occurrences of the past few days, but he began by
asking the delver about his own journey.
"When Holli brought the algors here, she told me what had happened in the hills.
Mountain shags." He sighed lightly. "I can not believe that only a short while ago even I
doubted Lief Woodson's word when he warned us of the danger in the air. Now we face
so many things, so many uncertainties, including mountain shags. But by your
appearance now, I can assume that all went well?"
"I handled the shag alright, but I can't say my trip back wasn't without its problems."
Ryson's expression bordered on exasperation. "Things are starting to fall apart out there,
and fast."
Mappel waited for the delver to continue with an expectant, yet curious expression.
"It seems vampires are now loose in the land and goblins are making raids on towns,"
Ryson explained with heavy emotion. He coughed after he spoke as if the words left a
bad taste in his mouth. "I don't know how this will affect any of the plans you've made,
but I can tell you the people and guards in Burbon are near total panic. I would expect the
same in Pinesway. They're closer to the forest. I don't know how the people in Connel
have reacted to your presence here, but I doubt you would be welcome in either of the
other two towns. They're edgy about anything that looks even slightly out of place. Trust
is stretched to a limit. I apologize for how this will sound, but if they saw you for what
you are, they'd lock you up as a threat, or worse."
"I understand." Mappel's attention momentarily fixed upon the staff in his hands. He
stared at the fine grooves as if each represented another factor of the present dilemma,
another external force trying to exert its own influence upon them all. "The land is in
turmoil and it seems most humans with it. It is probably no surprise to any elf that the
humans would treat us with the utmost mistrust. Their ignorance of the past has led them
to their own confusion. While it would not justify such actions, it would not be
unexpected. I would have to agree that revealing ourselves in such places would remain
inappropriate at this time. Thankfully, however, our path does not end in Burbon or
Pinesway. It will lead us from Connel to Sanctum."
"How have you fared here?" Ryson asked with a raised eyebrow.
"The magic has been slow to reveal itself here," Mappel offered with a look of relief.
"What has happened has been kept quiet. Connel's own location has also helped serve to
this end. With other border towns closer to the wilderness, there are more inviting targets.
I imagine that the dark creatures have also not forgotten Connel's history. The ancient
wall would remind them of their greatest loss. I doubt any goblin party would hasten to
raid this town."
The delver found such theories less encouraging. "Even if there hasn't been a raid
here, I know word is spreading. Soon, people are going to start hearing stories.
Everyone's going to start looking for an answer. When I came in to town this morning, I
saw everyone looking over their shoulders. I also saw guards on horseback at the town
limits."
"I can not deny the truth in your words," Mappel conceded, "but for now we remain
hidden, even the algors were brought to us without raising a single suspicion. Our
presence here has been kept a secret, helped oddly enough by Mayor Consprite. He does
not know of the dwarves’ presence, but he knows of mine and the algors. Those guards
were his men, and they helped escort the algors here, keeping it as quiet as possible."
"Consprite did that?" Surprise and suspicion edged Ryson's words and the tone was
not lost upon Mappel.
"I am perplexed by the man myself. He has kept his distance, yet has made it clear he
wishes to be involved. His men did as promised, yet they appeared more elusive than
helpful. Through Matthew, we have been sending him information, telling him only of
what he needs to know. I doubt it satisfies him, but he appears content, at least for now. I
do not trust him. Am I misjudging him?"
"I doubt it," Ryson responded in earnest. "I've only spoken with him a few times, but I
never met anyone who was more ambitious. If he wishes to be involved, it's probably
because he believes he can benefit."
"Of that, I am certain, but we will all benefit if our mission is successful."
Ryson shook his head with a near sorrowful expression, as if it pained him to discuss
the subject of human greed and overabundant ambition. "That's not want I mean. The
mayor won't see anything advantageous in a general gain for the land. Consprite will
want to gain personally. It's not beyond him to take advantage of another's misfortune."
"Then, my initial judgment has been correct. I can not dismiss the perceptions of a
delver, especially upon a subject I know so little about. The mayor will be dealt with only
as needed and always warily."
"Good idea," Ryson nodded.
Mappel moved on with urgency, as if it pleased him to leave behind discussions of
Mayor Consprite. "What about the vampires you spoke of?"
Ryson hesitated. The thought burned his mind like acid. He tasted the bitter anger on
the tip of his tongue.
"It's not a pleasant story," he finally admitted. He told the sequence quickly and
briefly, speaking in short pointed sentences. He gave an adequate account to be accurate
but refused to recount anything with great detail. He spoke of the most important
specifics, being followed by Evan Chase, Chase's demise, and the final conflict with the
vampire herself.
The mention of Evan Chase and his reasons for following the delver cast the
discussion back upon the mayor. Mappel displayed more than a hint of annoyance. "So
Consprite sent out a tracker to find what you had been doing. I do not like that. It
indicates he may not accept our decisions. I should like to treat him with as much care as
we would treat another vampire."
"That reminds me," Ryson interrupted and his attention descended to his belt where
the Sword of Decree hung sheathed. "It's time for me to return this now. To tell you the
truth, it's the main reason why I came back to Connel. Had it not been for the sword, I
might have stayed at Burbon to help protect them against goblin raids. But I knew it was
important to you, so I knew I had to return it. I've learned how special it is, and I
understand why you made me promise to look after it with such care. I wish you would
have told me of its other powers, though. It does more than burn an enemy; it can free
your mind. That in itself saved me from the vampire. I can't explain it, but I knew what to
do as soon as I grabbed the handle."
The statement confused Mappel. He sifted through the words as if a puzzle, or a
mystery where the perpetrator was known but not the crime.
"You are certain?" Mappel questioned with a wrinkled forehead.
"Absolutely." Ryson returned Mappel's questioning looks with a confused demeanor
of his own. "Didn't you know that?"
"No, I did not," Mappel said firmly. "Such power is not supposed to be. Could it have
come from something else, something other than the sword?"
"I don't think so." Ryson fought through the ugly images of his encounter with the
vampire to establish his certainty. "No, it came from the sword. I know it now and I knew
it then. Do you want to try holding the handle?" He went to dislodge the scabbard from
his belt.
"No, I can see the truth in your eyes," Mappel answered.
Ryson continued unfastening his belt. "Well, its time for you to take it back anyway. It
has been quite an honor, but it belongs to you."
Mappel made a statement which could do no less then shock the delver. "Not
anymore. Leave it at your side, Ryson Acumen. I do not know why the sword is now
blessed with a new power, but it was blessed in your hands and there it must stay."
Wide-eyed, Ryson refused. "I can't accept this."
"If you deny it, you are denying providence. None of us are in a position to do that."
"But this is a magical item that belongs to the elves. You've guarded it for so long."
"Yet it never earned its name in our hands. Now it has. If it will now reveal mysteries
to you by some act of benevolence, then the Sword of Decree will belong to you."
"What if it’s just the effect of the tainted magic in the air?"
Mappel shook his head. "According to Holli, she used the sword against a monster at
the edges of the Lacobian desert. She claimed no powers of any kind. And you yourself
just stated with certainty that the power came from the sword. No, Ryson Acumen, the
blessing has occurred in your hands and we are in need of all the blessings we can get.
You must hold onto the sword."
Ryson stood silent. Not knowing what else to do, and not wishing to insult the elf, he
finally accepted the gift. "Thank you. I'll try to wear it with honor."
"You already have," Mappel said sincerely. "Now, however, we must come to more
difficult matters. With your assistance, we have achieved a great stride toward our goal.
In the basement of this church, in a town as time-honored as Connel, we have gathered
representatives of the dwarves, the algors, as well as the humans and elves. I am pleased
that this gathering has taken place so quickly. Never could I have imagined that the races
involved in the tiers of Sanctum would be together in one place during my lifetime. Yet,
it has happened, and it is now. There are, however, two problems."
Ryson listened intently as the elf continued with an explanation.
"The first is that you are the only delver in our presence. You have already admitted to
a lack of knowledge over what the delvers placed in Sanctum to guard the sphere. Every
other key is now within our grasp. Even the human element is here. Stephen Clarin is the
interpreter of the book of Godson. Matthew told me he spoke of the interpreter to you?"
Ryson nodded. "Yes. Yes, he did. That's why he was so worried about the quake. This
interpreter was able to foresee many things, but he didn't predict the quake. He's here?
Now? What can he tell us about what's going on?"
Mappel shook his head sadly. "Precious little I'm afraid. It seems he believes the
sphere defies even the prophecies. He can not predict the outcome of this event, although
he has experienced a vision which yet brings us hope." Mappel quickly yet thoroughly
explained the visions as witnessed by the interpreter. He emphasized Ryson's
involvement in entering Sanctum, hoping to make it clear that the delver was expected to
be part of the force.
Ryson exhaled deeply but did not decline. "It seems I can't get away from this.
Truthfully, I was hoping to become more of an observer after I helped bring back the
algors. I never hoped to be included any further."
Ryson's thoughts returned to Burbon and Linda. He would have liked to return there,
to help them all. He remembered his promise to go back and tell her of what was truly
happening, but as he did, he recalled everything she said. It became a blueprint in his
mind. She asked him to return when he discovered everything he needed to know, even if
it took a season. He faced the true crux of his dilemma with that simple edict ringing
through his head. Would he be satisfied if he walked away now? Could he truly turn
away from the opportunity to enter Sanctum? Every instinct that was his, every natural
desire demanded he follow this to its end. He spoke with that conclusion.
"I can't tell you it makes me happy, but as a delver I can't refuse the opportunity to
explore a monument such as Sanctum. If you invite me to go along, I will have to
accept."
"It is more than invitation, it is an urgent need. We need you, and in all honesty, we
have need of the Sword of Decree. I might have been hasty to offer it to you as a gift, but
I see now in your eyes it was no mistake. Without it, we would not pass through the
tribulations of Sanctum, and without you, we would not fulfill the vision of the
interpreter."
"Then I will accompany you," Ryson responded, accepting his fate.
"It is good you feel that way. We will need you then, and we still have need of you
now. This returns us to the first problem. Assuming we convince those that are present to
reveal the secrets of what lies ahead in Sanctum, we will still be missing one part of the
puzzle. No one present knows the delver's portion of the secret. Stephen Clarin is aware
of what the humans placed within the mountain, but he has no idea of what the delvers
placed. No one does. I am hoping that you might direct us in that matter."
Mappel looked to the delver expectantly, but Ryson could only shake his head.
"I just don't know," he admitted. "I don't even know where to begin. I was told of the
importance of Sanctum as a kid, I was also told to avoid it. As far as I know, no one
knows what's in there. It's kind of strange. You would think that Sanctum with all its
secrets would be a place which would really call to a delver. But it hasn't, until now. It
was one of the only places that delvers accept must not be explored."
Mappel spoke as if his hopes were quickly draining from him. "There is no one else
you might know that we may ask?"
"We could go to the Night Watch Inn," Ryson offered. "There are other delvers in
Connel. One of them might know, or at least might know where to go to find out."
"But you wouldn't know which is the best suited to ask?"
"I've spoken to almost all those with delver blood that spend time in Connel. None
stand out as someone that might know what we need."
Mappel frowned. "I do not covet the idea of indiscriminately speaking to delvers at the
Night Watch Inn, plodding about carelessly, hoping to stumble on information. We have
done so well for ourselves so far. We have worked for the answers and they have come to
us, some miraculously. I can not accept that we were meant to sift through the land for
this secret as if searching for a single ant in a mountainous anthill. There must be another
answer."
"Well, there's none that I can think of."
Mappel stood leaning upon his long staff. His eyes focused on nothing in particular.
Long drawn out silence hung in the room like a giant tapestry. He became as still as a
statue. If not for the slow relaxed breaths or the blinking of an eye, Ryson would have
thought him carved of stone and painted to appear life-like.
Ryson arched his neck and examined the wooden rafters of the ceiling. He waited
patiently as Mappel continued his pose of reflection.
Finally, the elder elf broke his silent concentration with a weary shake of his head. "I
do not like this, not being able to decide what to do. Just as our other problem, there is no
conceivable solution. I am left groping for options that do not seem to exist. Why are we
brought so close, yet left without a final answer?"
"What is this other problem you're talking about?"
Mappel sighed heavily with frustration. The topic was a weight on his shoulders that
he would have liked nothing more than to cut free. "It is the dwarves, mainly Tun. He is a
prince, son of Folarok. He is here with his brother, Jon. He is not convinced the sphere
must be destroyed."
"Does he know what Shayed said to me and Lief?"
"He knows. He does not doubt the exchange occurred, and he does not truly question
Shayed's wisdom. Unfortunately, he wishes to explore other opportunities."
"Even though Shayed said we had to destroy the sphere?"
"You must remember that the dwarves are not fond of the thought of magic. They
believe it never truly benefited them. Tun Folarok echoes that belief in my ear at almost
every chance. He has been told that both he and his brother are part of the interpreter's
vision. It did little to convince him. In fact, it may have made things more difficult. He
now states that if something such as the will of Godson will lead us, then the will of
Godson will bring him the light of understanding. While he sits and listens, he only
responds that nothing miraculous has yet occurred to sway his position. If he is waiting
for some kind of miracle, I don't know if we will ever convince him.
"His brother, Jon, is more reasonable, more rational, yet he is cautious. He wishes to
remain loyal to his brother as well as avoid his anger, thus he will not speak out against
him. If it were just him, I am certain we could move forward, for he also knows the secret
of Sanctum."
"Then why do we need his brother?" Ryson questioned. "We can leave Tun to wait for
his miracle if we can convince Jon to help us."
Mappel's voice was thick with dissent. "They have been sent together by the king, and
so together they will listen to our requests. Tun is the elder and has the right of the throne.
Jon would never consider opposing his brother. Unfortunately, it is Tun who we must
convince, yet he gives us little opportunity."
Mappel looked over his staff as he pieced the problem together. Hoping he himself
might find an answer previously overlooked, he outlined the difficulty with a precise
tongue. "The problem has been complicated further by Stephen's vision. Stephen sees
both Folarok princes entering Sanctum. This is what truly creates the misfortune of our
situation. I use it to explain that Tun must assist us. Tun uses it to accent his doubts. We
traipse around in circles. I can not ignore the vision. Because of this, I am certain Tun
must be made to see the reason of what we must do, but I do not know how to convince
him. I keep hoping he will see what must be done on his own accord, but he shows no
sign. He waits for divine intervention, so I wait as well. But I do not know how much
longer I can wait. All I know is that Stephen believes they are both integral to our plans,
and therefore we can not ignore them."
"Is Stephen certain about this vision?"
"He is. I am as well. For some reason, I now have great conviction in the visions of
the interpreter. It was something to behold, the calm serenity, the sense of joy on his face
when he revealed to us greater details of his vision. It is hard not to have faith when one
witnesses such a thing. As I said, he believes you have a major role to play yet in this
challenge. I believe it would have saddened all our hearts if you declined. It will sadden
us as much if Tun can not be convinced. I am hopeful that we will match Stephen's vision
exactly when we send our force into Sanctum.
"Lief Woodson and Holli Brances will represent the elves for this endeavor. This
meets with the interpreter's approval, who will go himself. He has also ventured forward
and brought another into our fold. A human woman named Lauren. In his vision, the
group numbers ten, and he insists she must be one of them. That leaves but three yet to be
decided. I believe, as does Stephen, that at least two will be algors. The algors have
agreed to the overall plan. None of their group has spoken against it. In fact, they speak
as one voice."
"Tell me about it," Ryson replied with knowing exasperation. "It's kind of unnerving
to hear them speak together. It's worse, though, when they disagree. They all speak at the
same time; they don't listen to each other. They just start yelling out what they think."
"Luckily, I have not yet witnessed such turmoil," Mappel stated with thankfulness in
his words. "Overall, it has been quite easy to convince them of the need for their
assistance. The only matter which concerns me is that I don't know which two should be
part of the ten, and they don't seem prepared to make any choice to that end.
"Finally, there is the last spot, the tenth member of the party. Whoever it shall be, it
remains a mystery. Stephen can not clearly decipher the image."
"Maybe it's another delver," Ryson offered. "There's two of everybody else; two
humans, two dwarves, two elves, and two algors. Maybe the tenth will be a delver that
will answer the mystery to that tier."
Mappel shrugged wearily. "Perhaps, and perhaps not. Stephen is at a loss to describe
the tenth. We can only wait for answers and time now weighs upon us. I was hoping your
return would end that wait."
"I don't know what to tell you."
"No one does." Mappel waved his hand.
Ryson considered much of what had been said. Questions popped into his mind over
the new arrival. "What do you know of this Lauren?"
"She apparently has great natural ability to control the magic which is now free. She is
quiet and I do not know how to judge her. Stephen, however, states she is as much a part
of our struggle as any other. He also states her abilities will be needed when the human
tier is to be overcome."
"She's a sorceress?" Ryson could not contain his surprise.
"Apparently so."
"Really? I would have never guessed that any human would have practiced such a
thing."
"You misunderstand. She has not been able to practice the art because the magic had
been contained until now. She does, however, have natural abilities and tendencies that
allow her to manipulate the energy with greater control than other humans. It is just like
the other races, except for maybe the dwarves. There are always some more attuned to
magic than others. Some say it is inherited, some say it is random. They will hear the
whisper of spells in the air. Instinctively, they sense how to draw in the power,
manipulate it. With time, they will learn how to control the power and it will be up to
them how they use it. According to Stephen, Lauren has mastered much in the past few
days, although it still worries me that our fates may rest in the hands of a novice magic
caster."
"It doesn't sound like we have any choice or that we should have any concern either,"
Ryson offered, hoping to rejuvenate the elf's apparently dwindling confidence. "If the
interpreter says we need her and that she can help us, that in itself is important. After all,
this man's apparently blessed. And if she's part of that vision you witnessed him having,
that's only more reason to believe in her."
Mappel did find relief as well as comfort in the delver's words. "It is a privilege to be
near you," he stated with great sincerity. "You have a way of inspiration about you."
Ryson looked to the ground humbly.
"I am glad we took the time to have this talk," Mappel continued. "But it is now time
to present you to the others."
Without another word, Mappel turned as he motioned for Ryson to follow. He stepped
with the weariness of his age, but with the determination of his strong will. His staff
clicked loudly against the stone steps that led them down into the cellar meeting room.
The echoing thumps announced their entrance to all who waited below, human, elf, dwarf
and algor. All of which grew silent as the two forms moved beyond the last step and into
the heart of the chamber.
Ryson's eyes adjusted instantly to the lesser light of the basement. He nearly laughed
in disbelief at the odd assortment of individuals. Such an array of oddities would have
sent him reeling headlong into utter confusion had he not been through so much. Now,
such a sight brought more accepting humor than gasps of disbelief.
The ten algors huddled together in one corner. Their large bulging eyes focused on
him in tandem. They nodded together as if choreographed, their heads moving at exactly
the same angle and speed. They appeared quite content.
Such was not the case for two broad shouldered, bearded men who sat separated from
the others. One with coal black hair maintained an air of aloofness as well as defiance.
His back remained straight, although his feet barely touched the ground from the bench
where he sat. He kept his eyes locked on the delver, but stared without making any sort of
acknowledgment. The other, with slightly graying hair, sat with a slight slouch. He
remained observant of his surroundings, but by his positioning it was clear he was less
antagonistic to the cause than the other.
Ryson noted Holli Brances and Lief Woodson in the center of the room. He nodded to
both. They sat with three humans. He immediately recognized Matthew, but the other two
were strangers.
The female had to be Lauren. He had a difficult time assessing her age. Her face
appeared youthful, but fresh lines of bewildered worry aged her complexion. Her hands
were knotted before her as she clasped them with constant tension. Her clothes were fine
enough to indicate she had come from a family of limited success, perhaps she was the
elder daughter of a merchant, or perhaps the young wife.
The other was a young man who watched with a broad smile. Radiance glistened from
his face, almost enough so that it appeared brighter than the light from the small candles.
Ryson could not keep his eyebrows from shooting upward into a questioning expression.
There was no other human about, besides the woman and Matthew. He did not have a
true expectation of the interpreter, but he was not prepared for such youth.
He looked about, wondering if there might be another answer, maybe this youth was
only an aide of the interpreter, but there was no place for another to hide in this room. If
the interpreter was before him, it had to be this person. His assumption was confirmed
upon the introductions handled by Mappel.
"I knew you as soon as I saw you." Stephen smiled happily upon their introduction.
"You are of great importance to us all."
Ryson tried to shake the surprise from his face. He offered his hand to the youth.
"Thank you, but it seems to me you're even more important. It's an honor to meet
someone blessed by Godson."
Stephen could not refrain from casting a glance to Ryson's side where the sword hung
proudly. He smiled wider but said nothing on the subject. Instead, he turned to the
woman beside him.
"This is Lauren. She prefers that I don't use her last name."
Lauren held out her hand, but returned it to its knotted fold after quickly and gently
shaking the hand of the delver. She tried to keep her eyes focused on that which was
around her. It was an obvious struggle for her to keep attention upon the matters
discussed in the church cellar.
Ryson saw turmoil in this woman, the same turmoil he experienced as a youthful
delver discovering his own unique abilities, but he was not afforded the opportunity to
converse of such matters, for Mappel quickly guided him to the dwarf princes.
"This is the one I've told you about ..."
Mappel's words were cut off by a great commotion upstairs. There were only a few
followers of Godson in the church at the time, but it sounded as if there were dozens.
Shouts of surprise were heard from both the street and the upper chambers. The heavy
thud of a door being thrown open and hitting a far wall rang through the cellar. The patter
of running feet spread over their heads as if the followers were scattering in every
direction at once.
Silent confusion overtook those gathered. All eyes were pointed upwards, although in
different directions. All the algors spied the same spot over their heads. The dwarves
scanned the entire ceiling, trying to follow each noise. Holli Brances looked only briefly
toward the top of the staircase before she became the first to react, immediately followed
by Lief.
Holli leapt over a table with balanced grace. She cocked an arrow in her bow as she
took a position behind the table closest to the stairwell. If anyone was to get to the others,
it was clear they would have to get through her first.
Lief bolted to a strategic stance in a corner opposite Holli's position, creating an
angled crossfire. Anyone entering the room from the stairs would now face a hail of
arrows from both directions. The two stood silent, emotion cleansed from their faces.
Ryson moved up to Holli's side. His hands were steady as he drew one hand near to
the handle of his sword. The other he placed in his bag and quickly recovered his dagger.
He kept it in his left as his right remained free, ready to unsheathe the Sword of Decree in
a moment's notice.
At the back of the room, each algor calmly removed a sling from their respective
pouches as well as finely rounded stones. They did not immediately load their weapons,
instead they waited and watched patiently.
The dwarves stood from their bench, rather unceremoniously. A human bench was not
designed for their stature, and they struggled to be free from it. In a display of
displeasure, Tun kicked the bench over in order to step back to clearer ground. Holli and
Lief paid no attention to the crash of the wooden bench, but everyone else jumped with a
start. Tun made no sign of apology. Instead, he freed the great maul from his belt and
stood ready with an angry stare.
Jon also stepped toward an open area, but his mace remained attached to his belt. His
hand was at his side ready to free it for use, but for now, he watched with cautious eyes.
Matthew and Stephen remained at Lauren's side. Her eyes were closed. She mumbled
something to herself and then spoke aloud.
"No, it's alright. Don't be alarmed."
Most turned their attention to her, even as the door to the cellar stairs whisked open,
but Lief, Holli and Ryson kept their focus on the first visible step. They were the first to
see the huge gray foot which broke the plane of the doorway. It dropped down and landed
upon the top step with a dull thud. Immediately, a second foot of equally mammoth size
moved into the light of the cellar lamps and fell upon the next step down.
Ryson's eyes grew as wide as their sockets as he witnessed ankles and shins roughly
the size of huge tree trunks. Step by step, more of the visitor became revealed to all those
that watched in awe. It barely fit through the arch of the staircase. Had the clearing for
the steps been the span of a hand narrower, the passage would not have allowed entry.
Even now, the mammoth visitor was forced to bend and twist to pass through the tight fit.
When the newcomer finally moved beyond the last step and fully into the basement
chamber, he continued to slouch so as not to scrape the top of his head upon the ceiling.
Ryson's mouth hung open ever so slightly. He blinked once, then again, but the sight
remained before him. When having to describe the cliff behemoth to others in the future,
he would simply ask the listener to imagine what a giant boulder would look like if it
grew arms, legs and a head. Put a green and brown tunic over it, and you would have
what Ryson now witnessed.
The skin of this giant looked as rough as sand paper and as hard as rock. The head,
held lofty in the air upon a short powerful neck, was round but flat on the top. Deep
rounded sockets held innocent blue eyes. A deep short slit under a round pudgy nose
formed the mouth. There was no hair anywhere to be seen. None of its muscle structure
appeared under the thick hide, and thus, it appeared as one solid, rather inflexible mass as
opposed to a composition of bone, muscle and skin.
Both Lief and Holli lowered their bows as the giant stood motionless before them.
Ryson's dagger dangled in his hand, but astonishment precluded any decision of using it.
Lauren spoke first. "He means us no harm." Her voice held a certainty as if this was a
common fact.
"Of course he doesn't," Mappel echoed in a voice filled with relief. His eyes, however,
darted back and forth from the cliff behemoth to the ceiling overhead. His expression
revealed his misgiving over what was occurring beyond the basement chamber. Voices of
panic still cried out both in the church as well as in the streets beyond the door.
"I am afraid my entrance has upset many, but the will of Godson is clear. Nothing
must stand in the way." The cliff behemoth's voice carried as if a feather blown by the
wind. It was soft and gentle, but it flowed to the furthest corners of the room. Its soft
melody was a stark contrast to the newcomer's physical appearance.
Mappel's eyes fixed upon the cliff behemoth. He now ignored the clamor over his
head. Stephen Clarin also looked on in increased interest, but it was the elf that asked the
question that burned both their minds.
"Why has Godson's will brought you here?"
The behemoth spoke in the same soft tone. "It is our task to deal with the sphere. It is
the will of Godson."
Stephen Clarin stood and he blurted out his own revelation with both excitement and
amazement. "You are the last of the group! It is all clear to me now! You are the tenth!"
The interpreter's outburst ripped Mappel's attention from the cliff behemoth. The elder
elf took a hand from his staff and rubbed his forehead in weary confusion.
"This is all happening much too fast," he admitted.
"No, it's true," Stephen insisted. "I could not see him because I could not understand
what I saw. I thought it was a shape that still had not taken form. But it had! And it was
that form!"
"I do not understand everything he says, but most is very clear and I do know the will
of Godson," the cliff behemoth spoke to all in the room. "I am to accompany you to the
mountain you call Sanctum. There we must deal with the sphere and end the threat to all
Godson's followers."
Matthew moved from his place and stepped forward to meet the giant. "I am Matthew.
I am the reader for this church, it is a Church of Godson. I do my best to follow the ways.
I have read about cliff behemoths, how they devote their lives to the word and the ways.
It is an honor to meet you."
"I am indeed a cliff behemoth. My name is Dzeb. And it is a pleasure to meet a human
who has not forgotten the word."
Matthew could not help but smile broadly. The appearance of a cliff behemoth did as
much to strengthen his faith as all the revelations of the interpreter. "Thank you, thank
you. All of the followers of this church do their best to remain faithful, though we would
never boast of matching the faith of your kind."
Dzeb nodded in appreciation of the benevolent words, but this friendly meeting was
quickly interrupted by Mappel who appeared to regain his composure.
"Come forward Dzeb. It is true what you say. We are preparing to deal with the
sphere, but there is much I need to ask you. Much that may help us on our way."
Dzeb walked further into the room as Lief, Holli, and Ryson followed behind. A
bench would not hold his weight so he continued to stand, although in a hunched
position. Everyone else in the room now also stood in respect for the cliff behemoth's
difficulties.
"There is little to discuss," Dzeb said with the same comforting voice. There was no
hostility in these words, no sense of defiance or challenge. He spoke as if everyone was
already in agreement. "The angels of Godson have brought the message, a message
received by all cliff behemoths. I knew of your presence here before I entered this
building. I am to accompany you to Sanctum where we must deal with the sphere. It is
very simple. This man knows that." He nodded to Stephen Clarin. He then turned to
another. "This one knows as well, although the knowledge is not yet clear to him. It will
come as time passes."
"You mean me?" Ryson could not control his surprise.
"Yes. You are the delver?"
"Yes, but ..."
Dzeb did not let Ryson finish. "Give yourself time delver. You will understand much
in the time to come. What is your name?"
"Ryson Acumen."
Mappel took the opportunity to introduce all to the cliff behemoth. When he was
finished, he pressed for greater details of the giant's knowledge of the sphere.
"I do not wish to insult you, Dzeb," Mappel spoke guardedly, "but I must know why
the cliff behemoths feel they must participate in this matter. You must tell me more than
it is Godson's will."
"Should that not be enough?" Dzeb questioned.
"To your people it would undoubtedly be enough. To many in this room, it would be
enough as well. But there are those that see things differently than the cliff behemoth.
You must at least acknowledge that."
"Yes, that is true." Sadness did not show on the giant's face, but it was now evident in
his voice. "It seems as time moves on, more move away from the word and the way."
Mappel quickly took the reins of the conversation as he endeavored to direct it toward
gaining the knowledge he so direly needed. "I do not wish to dishearten you and by no
means do I question your intentions. The help of a cliff behemoth is a benefit I would
have never dared hope, but cliff behemoths were not present during the Wizard War.
Your kind was not concerned with the sphere during its entombment. Why now?"
"The sphere has changed," Dzeb answered simply. "The Wizard War was a conflict of
individuals, those that wanted the magic free and those that wanted the magic removed
from the land. Such matters are not the concern of Godson, thus they are not the concern
of cliff behemoths."
"But what of the taint?" Mappel persisted. "The taint was a threat to all."
"True, but the war was not about the poison in the air. Had it been, we might have
joined. At first, the battle was about stopping Ingar. We watched closely at that point.
The outcome would impact the land, but Ingar was defeated. After that, it became a battle
over what to do with the sphere, individuals arguing over what should be done, arguing
over a choice. We kept our distance."
"We argue over that now," Mappel said with an edge, and he glanced over his
shoulder at Tun. "We are trying to decide what to do about the sphere and this threat."
"Has this one not told you what must be done?" Dzeb pointed to Stephen, his large
finger cut the air like a giant spear.
"He has, but others still need to be convinced."
Dzeb merely shook his head as he dropped the accusing finger.
"Tell me what you believe is going on with the sphere now?" Mappel urged. "That
may be what some need to hear in order to convince them of what we must do."
"It is challenging the will of Godson." For the first time Dzeb's words sounded almost
harsh, but they soon returned to the soft tone which was their norm. "This can not be
allowed."
"It is true then," Stephen blurted out with a half gasp. "How can this be possible?"
"All living things have the freedom of choice," Dzeb announced kindly. "That too is
the will of Godson and perhaps the most important ingredient of life in this land. We all
choose what path to follow, whether it is in the light of Godson or in the dark paths. The
sphere has become conscious, and therefore it has the ability to choose. Usually the
choice of one has little impact on the land. In rare cases, a choice of an individual can
affect thousands of creatures. In this case, considering the power of the sphere, its choice
affects us all."
"Then the sphere is alive?" Matthew asked, nearly dumbfounded by the possibility.
"I would say no." Dzeb spoke almost cautiously now. "It is my belief that only
Godson can grant life. Awareness and consciousness is another matter. Dark forces have
been known to grant such powers, but they can not create a soul. I know this is very
confusing, but it is the best I can do to explain. It is told that such things will be made
clear to us when we all finally meet Godson. The important matter is that the sphere is
now conscious and aware of its surroundings. It wishes to destroy the land. For what
reason, I do not know. It is our honor to stop this. I will accompany those you send to
Sanctum and we shall deal with the sphere."
Mappel still struggled for greater detail from the cliff behemoth. "You keep saying
that, but I don't understand what you mean. How do we deal with the sphere?"
"It must be destroyed."
Tun quickly raised a challenging voice. Even though Dzeb stood much more than
twice his height, the dwarf looked at the giant with unrelenting defiance. "Of that I have
still not been convinced."
Dzeb calmly eyed the antagonistic Tun for but a moment. "Now I understand." He
slowly turned his head toward Ryson. "Give him your sword," the giant requested. "Let
him hold the handle with the blade free of its sheath."
Ryson shrugged, but did not hesitate in obeying. He carefully guided the sword from
its scabbard. As more of the blade became revealed, it glistened with greater brilliance. It
soon magnified the candlelight surrounding it. Tun and Jon squinted only for a moment,
but even their dwarf eyes soon grew accustomed to the silvery illumination. Ryson
carefully gripped the blade at its center and extended the handle toward Tun.
At first, the dwarf remained frozen in place, his arms folded across his chest. Finally,
he extended one hand and took hold of the handle. As he did, the gleaming light of the
blade appeared mirrored in his face. The defiant expression softened, and he looked about
the room as if seeing all for the first time.
"We must destroy the sphere," he said calmly.
Jon looked at his brother with both confusion and concern. "Are you sure, Tun?"
Tun released his grip on the handle as he let Ryson take hold of the blade once more.
As the delver sheathed the sword, Tun's understanding remained.
"We have no choice. If we do not, we will all be destroyed."
"And what of the magic?" the younger dwarf pressed.
"We must learn to live with it. We have no choice."
"Then we also have the miracle we have been looking for," Mappel announced with
renewed hope and excitement.
"Do not confuse miracles with enlightenment," Dzeb counseled. "We have been but
shown the way. There is much yet to be done."
"Then let us be started," Mappel replied quickly. "Let us take advantage of what has
happened here. Let us remember this moment as we set out to accomplish what we must
do."
Heads nodded and turned about from one to another. Murmurs of conversation broke
from nearly every direction. The chatter brimmed with hope as yet another difficulty was
overcome by the apparent means of providence.
It was Ryson who called for attention and brought the focus of the meeting back upon
those difficulties which yet remained.
"I don't mean to bring everyone down, but let's not forget what we still have to do. We
still have to enter Sanctum. There are still the mysteries of the tiers, and there is still one
we don't know. There is no one here that knows what the delvers placed in the mountain.
It may take time to uncover that secret."
"I am afraid, young delver, that will not be possible," Dzeb said kindly yet firmly.
"While the angels which spoke said it would be the decision of those here as to who
would go, they made it clear when we must go. We must leave for Sanctum today, before
the sun passes overhead."
The hush held. Sanctum now! No further delay. It was like a death sentence.
Mappel broke the silence with a steady voice. "Listen all of you. We have been led
through these most important times so far and have accomplished much. We have done
so without the help of ancient prophecies. In every case, we have accepted the
circumstances dictated to us. We must continue to do so, and we must do so without
hesitancy. If those that enter Sanctum must face a tier without knowing of the danger, we
must hope that some way, some how, they will overcome the obstacle as other obstacles
have been overcome. It will be enough to reveal those secrets we do know. We have four
of the five parts. Let us tell them now. I will begin and state what the elves have ..."
Stephen Clarin cut him off abruptly. His voice was full of force.
"No!" The sharp, near angry retort caught the elder elf unprepared, but Stephen
continued to speak with forceful determination. "This isn't the time! I have told you
before that we will know when the time has come. The only way it would make sense to
reveal them now would be if they could all be revealed together. We are missing the one
secret for a reason. The secrets should remain just that. They should only be revealed in
Sanctum, to those who face the danger."
"That is an unnecessary risk," Mappel argued.
"But it is a risk we must take. You have put faith in my visions. If that is to remain,
you must accept everything I see. We can't pick and choose. We can not say I accept this,
but not that. I know that it would be a grave mistake to announce the secrets now. If we
leave on this day, we leave without revealing what we know. Otherwise, you might as
well refute everything I've told you. There is only one way we can proceed at this point.
Everyone that must enter Sanctum must know their portion and must be prepared. I know
what the humans have placed in Sanctum. I will keep that knowledge to myself. When
the ten, of which I am included, face the human tier, I will direct them as to how to
proceed. The same will remain true for the dwarves, the algors, and the elves."
"I agree," Tun replied sharply. "I will feel safer if I do not know of these secrets until
absolutely necessary."
Mappel could not accept the arrangement. If something had happened to the party of
ten, there would be no way to regain the information. If the secrets were brought into
Sanctum, they could be easily lost, perhaps forever. How much time would be forfeited
in finding the other human with the proper knowledge, or finding algors willing for
another siege upon the legendary monument? He spoke of such fears to press his point.
"And what if a mishap falls upon one of the party and the secret becomes buried in an
untimely death. I loath to speak of such things, but you are entering Sanctum. If
something should happen to you, Stephen Clarin, how would we continue our struggle?
The risk is high. We must do whatever is necessary to reduce the risk. Remember, you
yourself can not foretell the success or failure of this mission. Should you fail, the rest of
us will still strive to destroy the sphere. If we speak of the secrets now, openly, we allow
for hope in such a case."
The interpreter made no indication of backing away from his proposal. It was part of
his vision, and thus part of the word of Godson. "If such a thing may happen, and Godson
willing it won't, we will face the unknown tier as we will face the delver tier, prepared for
the worst but determined to overcome what might await."
"He is right," Lauren added as she looked toward the staircase with renewed distress.
"There are other considerations as well. This is no longer the place to discuss such
secrets. There are now ears above us, waiting for answers." Her anguish grew, her alarm
more evident than ever. Her mouth hung open, ever so slightly. She stared beyond the
ceiling, beyond the walls of the church. She saw into the streets. Her own vision, magical
sight, spread like a falcon taking wing. After moments of silent staring, she blinked
repetitively. Her voice wavered as she stood with near consuming trepidation. "There is
also danger growing outside. We must decide quickly!"
The algors finally spoke up, and as was their norm, the ten spoke in unison.
"We agree with the interpreter. We will hold our secret, but there is one more thing to
be determined. In order to match the vision of the interpreter, there is only to be two of us
which must go. The rest will stay here. The delver will choose which will go and which
will stay."
"Again?" Ryson heaved a heavy sigh. "You can't keep asking me to make these
decisions. Let Stephen decide which of you best match his vision."
"I can not distinguish between them," the interpreter said sadly. "I only know that two
should go. I don't know which two. Which of them knows what is hidden in Sanctum?"
"We all know," the algors responded in chorus.
Suddenly the algors began speaking separately, one after another, sometimes at the
same time.
"We are a community of individuals, but none knows more than another."
"You can not ask us to pick among ourselves."
"We all wish to go."
"We all understand if we have to stay."
"There is none of here which will assume to make such a decision."
"If you say that only two may go, then you must tell us which two."
"The delver has picked wisely before, let him pick again."
The cacophony of opinions continued until Lauren made a distressed plea. "We don't
have time for this. I feel as if these walls might soon become our prison."
"Very well, very well," Mappel urged. "Ryson make your choice. Do not dwell upon it
and do not torture yourself. Simply choose and let us be off."
Ryson closed his eyes as his body became filled with tension. "I don't like this," he
mumbled to himself. "I have no idea of knowing." With shoulders slouched, he opened
his eyes and pointed to two, hoping to be as random as possible.
"It is done," Mappel stated as if punctuating the selection. "I do not believe, however,
the remaining algors should stay here. If danger is closing as Lauren sees it, we must all
leave together. Those algors not chosen may remain with myself and Matthew outside
Sanctum as the others make their journey into its midst, unless of course there is an
objection."
At first Mappel looked toward Tun, wondering how he would respond to the
accompaniment of algors that would far outnumber any other race. He said nothing, his
face still softened from his experience with the Sword of Decree.
He looked next to the algors. They also remained silent.
"Please let us go!" Lauren cried, near begging.
"Get the algors their cloaks," Mappel instructed both Lief and Holli. "It is midmorning with many around. I dislike leaving at such a time. We must at least make an
attempt to avoid attention."
Holli and Lief moved with swiftness.
The dwarves kept coats by their sides and gathered them around their shoulders. If
they kept their hoods up and hid their beards, they would appear as nothing more than
powerful youths, not yet done growing.
"What about Dzeb?" Ryson asked. "How are we going to hide him?"
"You can't hide him," Lauren stated, still beseeching the others to move quickly.
"Many saw him enter the town. They know he's here. That's what brought so much
attention on us in the first place."
"Then I will leave as I entered," Dzeb said firmly.
"I don't know if that's a good idea," Matthew stated with a hint of sadness. "Many
humans will hate you simply based on how you look. With what is going on in the land,
they might attack based on nothing more."
"I will trust in Godson to protect me."
"We couldn't hide him if we wanted to," Mappel said with finality. "His height and
size would make any attempt foolish."
Lief and Holli had returned and the algors were quickly fastening their cloaks. The
party gathered together near the stairs, but Mappel stopped them for one last moment.
"Alone we face uncertainty, but together you can overcome the mysteries of Sanctum
and the threat that burdens the land. Forget now of what you don't know, and bring to
mind that what you do. I ask of each of you that will enter Sanctum to consider what you
know of what lies ahead and if you have the means to deal with it. Keeping our secrets
does not mean denying the ability of the party to overcome the obstacles. I will tell you
now that although what awaits you in the elfin tier will not be easily passed, it can be
done with what you now possess. What of the rest of you?"
Tun answered first. "The dwarf tier is first. My brother and I are prepared with the
proper knowledge. If those that follow us will follow our instructions, we will succeed in
getting through the first tier."
"The human tier is next," Stephen followed. "Lauren is the key to our success there."
"And what of the algors?" Mappel looked to the entire group, but only the two
selected responded.
"We shall pass," they said together, with greater confidence than either the dwarves or
Stephen.
"Then there is nothing left to do but go forward."


At Sanctum's peak, the spirit of the elfin sorceress Shayed peered to the east. Her
translucent face revealed neither joy nor desperation. Growing winds from the west
passed harmlessly through her transparent form. Even as small amounts of dust and
debris swirled about the ground, she floated unaffected by the gusts. The growing clouds
in the far west seemed of even less concern to her. The air remained dry, though the
temperature had fallen from its unseasonable highs.
"They are together. They know what they must do, and they will soon be here," she
murmured to herself with a nod. Again, it was impossible to read any emotion from the
spirit. It was as if she simply acknowledged the inevitable, as if she never doubted this
moment would arrive.
She could see them, although seeing would not truly describe the basis of her
awareness. It was more like understanding, or the completion of a thought. It was as
much like searching for an elusive word or melody that escapes until it finally comes free
in voice or in song. It took no special sorceress power for her to reach this point of
comprehension. Simply being a spirit allowed her greater awareness then when she had
walked upon the land as a mortal. That awareness grew sharper, crisper when it centered
upon all things connected with the sphere.
Such was her link with the talisman. What was of importance to the orb was important
to her. The two intertwined so tenaciously, her very presence upon this plane of existence
was attributable solely to the peril created by the sphere. Anything relevant to the matter
became as clear to her as stars on a cold, crystal evening.
Shayed could sense each of them. Even at this moment, she knew they remained
gathered in the basement of the ancient church, although they hastened to leave. There
were none missing. All that were required, all that were needed, were there. Each now
intended to help save the land; that was now clear to her as well. The doubts had been
lifted, and nothing was left to obscure the cause.
The image of the church remained crisp in her mind. It brought with it echoes of
Connel. Memories of her last living days in Uton flooded back to her. Even now, she
could still remember the great conflict between the forces she aligned and the magic
casters. The stone church, where people prayed when the Wizard War reached its fury,
served as sanctuary for many during the last terrible night of pitched battle. With the
knowledge obtained upon her own death, she now knew how important those prayers
were. Beyond the steps of the church, she could sense the ancient wall. She could almost
feel the solid, powerful stones the dwarves labored to build around Connel. To this day, it
remained mostly intact, just as the church stood upon its very same foundation. The
image of the church and the wall allowed her a moment of confidence. If they again
served in some way to aid those that battled the sphere, so much the better.
Her resolve to defeat the sphere never waned, even in these moments of reflection
upon the past, even as she realized how much of her life, how much of her essence, was
intertwined with this horrible device. It was during these moments of self inspection,
however, that she accepted the link between herself and Ingar's sphere.
It gave her purpose in life, and again in death. It brought her fame and a place in the
legends during her mortal existence. Now, it allowed her to return to the land, even as a
spirit. Such moments in history were rare in themselves, reserved for angels and
messengers of greater power, but again she found herself at the forefront of a battle where
all life hung in the balance. Again, her link with the sphere made her very existence as
important as any in the land.
Still, her purpose remained as if forged in steel. She would see to it that the talisman
was finally destroyed, removed as a threat forever. However, in the conclusion of that
joyous moment, she knew within herself that her own importance to the land would
diminish as well. She could not help but wonder what its final destruction would truly
mean to her. Certainly, she would savor the victory, relish the knowledge that the threat
to the land was defeated. But would there also be emptiness in the face of final success?
Could she be so vain that it might bring her sadness to see the end of that which brought
her glory? She knew she could not avoid the pride which would accompany destroying
the sphere. That, in itself, brought her no shame. It was the void which began to open
when her thoughts latched to a time beyond the orb. She did not know if she could find
fulfillment without purpose. The sphere offered purpose, but only as long as it existed.
Troubling thoughts.
Troubling enough to keep her from noticing, or even sensing, the stir behind her. The
very fabric of time and space dwindled and unraveled in an area no bigger than a large
man's fist. During a time when tainted magic spilled over the land and the destinies of all
living creatures were in the balance, even such a small disturbance held the potential for
enormous consequences. It afforded an opportunity for the essence of another to take
hold in this existence, one who was also long connected with the orb.
The small, wavering opening became a conduit and it crackled inaudibly with energy.
Red embers, as deep in color as any rose in the land, pulsated adrift in mid-air. The
energy broke free from the spatial rent just as the distortion closed. A crimson ball
remained just as would a mystery as to why the distortion occurred at all. Some would
say it was the sphere searching for an ally that rent the fabric of time. Others would argue
it was the efforts of the ally himself that caused the break.
The energy which first existed as a pulse of red light grew in size. It swirled about,
taking shape, forming greater detail with every second. The red tint remained even as the
pulsating energy elongated, grew proportionately, creating a body with limbs and a head.
As if molded from scarlet flames without heat or smoke, the shape of a man now
appeared upon Sanctum's summit. A cold expression of malice, or perhaps insanity,
clashed with the red glow that punctuated its existence. His shaven head glowed brighter
than any other part of his form. It held the crimson pupils that now fixed upon Shayed's
back.
With a silent wave of scarlet translucent arms, red chains crystallized from the very
air. Like demon serpents, they slithered through the sky with knifing speed and wrapped
themselves about the elfin sorceress before she could raise an arm in defense. Another
wave of an arm and the very air around Shayed shuddered in upheaval. Just as the red
chains restricted her movement, a field of crimson encircled her, blocked her path in
every direction.
The sudden manifestation of the magical chains ripped Shayed's focus from events far
away and brought her attention back to the here and now with sudden fury. The chains
swirled round and round about her, tightening with every curl. Forged of magical
energies, these chains lacked any material substance. Instead, they surged with power and
the ability to contain even the movements of one that lacked physical form.
In the wink of an eye, the barrier appeared, completely encasing her. The land before
her turned crimson as she peered through the walls of her newfound prison. Unable to
move her arms or legs, due to the restraint of the chains, she willed her form forward.
Floating on air with the bonds still about her, she collided with the wall of the force field.
It would not let her pass. It was as mystically charged as were the chains, and it prevented
her movements with the same efficiency.
Caught off guard, confused and angered, she spun herself about inside the bubble of
red. With every move, the chains grew tighter. As she faced her attacker and met his face
with recognition, her anger turned to fear. She muttered but one word as she recoiled, but
her back struck the wall of the force field and ended any hope of escape.
"Ingar!"
The wizard said nothing. He stood with arms ready as he scanned the effectiveness of
the restraints he forged. A careful eye probed every inch of the barrier, looking for gaps
or imperfections. He then focused upon the chains. He studied each link as he circled her
slowly.
From outside the sphere, her clear white shape took on a pink hue, a result of being
behind the crimson field. The shade, however, was far from a healthy pink. It manifested
itself more as infection, like the swelling, irritated tissue around an open sore.
Ingar cared little about the field's effect on her appearance. He concentrated upon its
ability to hold Shayed. Satisfied, he turned his back upon her, moved away as if she was
completely removed from the mountain top. His indifference to the sorceress was
replaced with cold disgust as he peered toward Connel in the same way as she had done
previously.
"So they do come. An interesting dilemma." His words vibrated with intensity.
Shayed found her courage and her voice. She bellowed a command with all the
strength of her being, though it was severely muffled within the confines of her prison.
"Release me!"
Ingar kept his back to his prisoner. He ignored her. The focus of his thoughts remained
squarely upon those at Connel. He was aware of them, just as Shayed was, but he spoke
of them with contempt. "I don't know if I could stop them all," he mumbled to himself. "I
will be weak for sometime. I have already used a great portion of my strength. I do not
believe I have enough left to deal with them directly. It will take time for them to get
here, but not time enough. Dwarves are very resistant, and the two are of royal blood.
They will surely be difficult. There is also something very special about that delver. I
sense trouble in him."
His expression went blank for long moments as he peered off toward the east in a lost
daze. Even as Shayed again called to be released, he continued to place his attention on
the small alliance which even now was beginning the final journey to Sanctum. One by
one he went through all those gathered together. He snapped back to attention with a nod
of his head. "And a cliff behemoth! They do come prepared."
Yet again, Shayed screamed with fury. "Release me, Ingar! Do not be a fool!"
He stood as if he could not hear her. He looked down the face of Sanctum Mountain.
"Perhaps a rock slide. That might stop them. Ah, but the delver is quick, both of sense
and of foot. He will warn them. At best, I might catch a few at random. The elves are also
very quick. They might save those that are slower, and cliff behemoths have been known
to stop landslides single-handedly. It is not a good plan.
"Another choice is to eliminate a selected few. It would be within my power by then
to kill the elves and the humans. To be rid of them would certainly hinder them. Their
secrets would die with them, the others would never pass what awaits them."
Again he paused before shaking his head. "Then again, they may yet succeed. A cliff
behemoth is a surprising creature. He might overcome what can not be revealed, and
there is something of the delver that still concerns me. If he is with them, they will
always have a chance."
Trying not to struggle against chains which tightened with every reflex, Shayed made
one last attempt to gain the wizard's attention. "Ingar, listen to me. You don't know what
you're doing. If you will not release me, at least listen to what I have to say. I know what
is happening here."
Ingar did finally turn from his lofty perch and moved back to the flattened ground
where Shayed remained imprisoned. He studied her carefully. "You do know what is
going on, don't you? Perhaps that information can be useful to me."
Shayed discounted the expression of animosity that ruled the wizard's face. Instead,
she focused her will, directed it through the barrier of her prison and directly at Ingar. "It
will be useful for you to let those that come complete their mission unimpeded."
"And why is that?" the wizard demanded with a sly reproach.
"Because the sphere threatens the land with obliteration."
"I am aware of that, that is why I am here," Ingar said simply. He did not need to hear
the idle ravings of this sorceress. She did not see the sphere as he did. However, she
might have different insights on the party of would-be invaders. She might know more of
their intentions, more of their weaknesses which he might exploit. "What is it you believe
will happen here and how will your followers strive to carry out your bidding?"
Shayed fought not against the chains that held her, but against the insanity, the cold
uncaring which gripped Ingar. "They're not carrying out my bidding, they're doing what
is necessary to save themselves and the land. I do not know how it came to pass that you
were able to come here, but you must release me. If you stop those that come, you will
cause the end of everything in the land. The struggle will end and you will crumble as
well."
"That is not completely the case," Ingar stated plainly. "Indeed the land will be altered.
That which was, will no longer be. That is the price for a glorious new beginning. The
power of the sphere will bring a new order. True, those that lived will die, but they will
be replaced. An end will come to the misdirected way of the land. Obliteration will not be
a curse, but a blessing, as the new power will remove this futile struggle between external
forces."
The idea was beyond evil, perhaps beyond insanity. What could anyone gain by the
obliteration of all things? Shayed replied with an attempt to reveal his folly. "And what
of you? Will you not be removed as well? Will you allow yourself to be destroyed to
carry out this absurd idea?"
"I will not be destroyed," Ingar replied callously. "The power of the sphere will
protect me. The rest will not be so fortunate, even you. I will remain to become lord and
master of this new order."
"You don't honestly believe that? There won't be any new order. You're being
controlled, manipulated by the sphere, just as you were upon your last mortal days. Can
you not see this?"
The wizard spoke dryly, void of emotion. Any anger or hostility dried in his words of
arrogance. "Your tricks are useless against me, sorceress. I am enlightened by the sphere.
I will not fall to such chicanery. Give up your delusions and tell me of those that are to
arrive here."
Shayed responded in frustration. She growled with intensity, a stark contrast to Ingar's
carefully measured words. "I will only tell you of what you already know. They come to
stop the sphere, to destroy it. And I don't believe you can stop them."
"Quite sure of yourself aren't you?" he said mockingly.
She glared at him behind her red prison, but said nothing.
Making no reply of his own, he turned back toward the east. His red form floated
deftly in the growing winds. As the sun fled behind dark clouds for the first time that
morning, the scarlet hue of his being glowed hotter in the wake of a darker sky. He
peered down the side of the mountain and his eyes passed over the fissure in its side. He
sensed the barrier which protected the gap, but allowed the magic to flow freely from
within.
"That way is closed to them; perhaps I might close the other entrance." With a twist,
he floated passed Shayed and towards a patch of ground seemingly no different than that
which surrounded it. "This is the opening which will lead to the first tier. If I seal this
with my own power they will not find a way inside. They will have to dig. Even with an
army of dwarves, it will take too much time. I will grow in strength as they weaken, and I
will obliterate them before they reach their goal."
He began to raise an arm, but it stopped as if it hit an unseen barrier. His head snapped
up in attention as yet again he looked to the east, towards Connel. Anger and frustration
filled his blood colored eyes. "A sorceress walks with them. It is not you I sense, elf. It is
a human. She is weak, but unpredictable. She might find the words to break my barrier.
Much would be lost if such a thing occurred. Creating this barrier would weaken me and
alert them to my presence. That will not do at all. The rock slide would be a better
choice."
"Allowing them free passage is the only choice!" Shayed screamed.
Ingar seemed to ignore her. "If I could just get closer to the sphere, I could drink in the
power, but I am as locked to this place as you. Wait a minute, what was it you said?"
Shayed went silent, unnerved by his curious expression.
"You said to let them pass," he answered his own question. "That may just be the
answer. I will let them pass. I will let them enter Sanctum and overcome the tiers. I will
let them bring the sphere out of Sanctum and right to me."
"They will never do such a thing!" Shayed gasped. "They will destroy it on the spot."
"Not if they are convinced such a thing will bring them harm."
He gave no further explanation. In a moment, Shayed would understand all too well
his intentions. Terror rose within her as he circled her again. This time, however, he
inspected her closely and not the chains.
He raised his hands, and within the passing of a strong gust of wind, Ingar appeared
just as Shayed. His face was as hers, his body was as hers. His red tint was gone, replaced
by a white which closely resembled her untouched shade. His hue was not as pure, the
white ever so slightly dingy, but in the growing darkness of the storm, it would not be
noticed.
Shayed gasped with both fear and anger. "You can not do this!"
"Oh, but I can. The fools believe in you. They will do whatever you say, or in this
case, whatever I say. They will either die in Sanctum or they will bring the sphere to me.
Either way, they shall fail. I will grow in strength and protect the sphere as well as any
barrier placed within this mountain. I will see to it that the will of the sphere is carried
out."
"I will not let you! Do you think I will remain silent? They'll see me here and I will
warn them. I will tell them to destroy the sphere."
"You will say nothing, they will neither see nor hear you."
With one last wave of Ingar’s hand, Shayed vanished. Chains, force field, and all, she
faded from sight.
"It is taking the last of my powers to bend the light and sound around you, but they
will be renewed in time."
From a vacuum in space, where light and sound could not escape, Shayed could see
out into the land but she could not be seen or heard. She had not moved from her place on
Sanctum's peak, yet to any who arrived, she would not be visible. She watched helplessly
as her imposter waited patiently for the arrival of Ryson and all those with him.


Mappel led the group quickly up the stairs into the main chamber of the church.
Godson followers nervously poked their heads around corners as they watched in
trepidation of the cliff behemoth that now stood comfortably in the open space. They
would have remained behind the security of those walls had Matthew not sought them
out.
He calmed them first, assured them, and reminded them what a cliff behemoth stood
for. The emotional swing from alarm to awe was clearly evident in their expressions.
Some walked away from the security of their hiding places to get closer to the giant.
Their faces filled with joy. It appeared as if their faith was upheld simply by witnessing
the existence of such a creature, as if seeing Godson.
Matthew urged a handful to complete other tasks. Politely, diplomatically, he pressed
upon them the need for urgency. He quickly set them upon errands as he himself
disappeared down the hall which led to his personal chambers.
The handful of church followers soon returned. Wide-eyed, joyous, they walked
passed the cliff behemoth and began handing out water bags and food sacks. Algors,
dwarves and elves alike thanked them as they stepped away from the group but remained
closer than before, as if being next to the giant added blessings to their souls.
Matthew returned with his Book of Godson in one hand and a rope in the other. Two
more followers brought up the rear, also toting ropes.
"I admit that I do not know what awaits you in Sanctum, but I do know that our
journey will go faster if we already are supplied with food and water. I also know that
when a mountain must be climbed or descended, rope comes in very handy. I would
bring more supplies if I had them, but we are a poor church."
Lief Woodson trotted forward to meet the reader and relieved him of the heavy rope.
He ducked his head through the center of the coil and let it hang upon the shoulder
opposite his bow. "It is more than we can ask for, good reader. Your forethought does
you well."
Holli and Ryson moved forward to take the remaining ropes, also placing them over
their shoulders.
"Is there anything else we might yet accomplish here?" Mappel asked of both those
that would travel with him and the followers of the church they would leave behind. He
was answered by silence and shaking heads. "Then it is time to ..."
"Wait!" Lauren called out with a warning as Mappel was about to direct them out the
front door. Her sight again focused beyond the walls, beyond the church and into the
streets. More jagged lines of anguish etched themselves permanently in her face. "Spies
watch this door. Men are coming this way now."
The hush in the church magnified, but now it carried heavy apprehension with it.
"They are coming for us," she added with certainty.
Holli Brances took command with the authority of a trained elf guard. "Everyone
move away from the door," she instructed firmly. She looked about the church, not for
the first time, but with new intentions. She now viewed it as an obstacle to overcome.
"This building would protect us well, but that is not our objective."
With strength and grace, she leapt over benches to reach the west wall. She peered out
a lone window and shook her head. "This building is isolated. It is in the open and the
light of day will not afford us cover. Even now people are gathered at a distance but have
their eyes upon us. It seems the cliff behemoth's entrance has brought great attention. Is
there another exit?" she asked of Matthew.
The reader pointed toward a hall to his left. "Down that corridor. There is a door
which opens to a smaller set of stairs at the back corner of the building."
"They watch there as well," Lauren warned as her eyes fixed upon the direction where
Matthew pointed.
Holli cursed but darted down the hall none the less.
"It is best to stay put and let her assess what we face." Lief spoke out calmly. "We can
do nothing but get in her way."
She returned in mere moments. "It is worse than the front door. The passage is narrow
and there are fewer paths for escape. We could be herded into an ambush. If we are to
leave, we use this door and we must leave now. We will be seen but that can no longer be
avoided. Follow me and move quickly. Ignore everyone and everything else around you.
If humans call for you to stop, ignore that as well. Stop only on my command. Lief, take
the rear and keep everyone together. Dzeb I will ask you to stay low and in the center of
our group." This last command was spoken with greater diplomacy, as if acknowledging
it was truly up to the cliff behemoth.
"I will do as you ask," Dzeb said as if nothing could trouble him, as if their dilemma
presented no true problem.
Holli nodded graciously. "It will help us greatly. Ryson Acumen, your abilities are
again needed. Lauren, I will request your help as well. Ryson you must move ahead of us,
scout the forward ground, but move no further than three of these human roads ahead of
me. Return often with all the information you can obtain. Lauren, I wish you to remain at
my side. I do not know if you understand your powers, but you show great ability to cast
sight spells. They will be of great service to us."
"I'm not sure I'm casting any spells," Lauren revealed with great emotion latching
upon her words. "I just see things. I don't know if I can control it."
"Then do not try," Holli said firmly. "Simply tell me what you see as you see it." She
lifted her head to the rest of the group. "We shall waste no more time. We go now."
With those words, Ryson Acumen bolted from the front door and down the front stone
steps. Caring little for the gawking stares of the onlookers that gathered after the arrival
of the cliff behemoth, he set about searching for true threats to their advance. His darting
eyes flashed upon one road, then another. His ears perked to the wind, he garnered the
rhythmic beat of horse hooves in several directions. While the crowd remained scattered
about, a collection of men appearing more angry than curious formed across the street.
Ryson knew the sight of the cliff behemoth would keep them at bay for a while, but one
troublemaker might goad the rest into an assault with rocks from a distance. It would be
best to steer the party in another direction.
His first reconnaissance complete, he returned to the front door of the church.
"People are gathering," he stated plainly to Holli. "I would recommend passage away
from the group across the way. I think you should move quickly. We'll startle them at
first, and we can probably take advantage of that."
"I fully intend to," Holli stated flatly.
"There are also horses moving in on our position. I can't tell how many."
Holli's expression went grim. "Which way are they coming from? Can we avoid
them?"
"They're as scattered as the crowd. It sounds as if they're being called in from all over
town."
"It must be Consprite," Matthew interjected. "He's the one who suggested he put
guards on horseback to help with the escorts. He probably had others on call to prevent us
from leaving as well."
"Fire upon the fool!" Lief spat. He pulled the bow from over his shoulder and took
firm grasp with a taut left hand. "Let me go ahead. I will handle Consprite."
"No," Ryson and Dzeb responded in unison, although in different tones. Dzeb's voice
was calm, yet forceful, as if such a ploy could not even be considered. Ryson allowed
emotion to paint his words, but it was Holli that ended any debate.
"No, Lief. We must stay together. It would be to their advantage to separate us. We
will fight only if necessary, but we fight together. Let us first try to outmaneuver them.
Ryson, scout passage to the right, away from those you deem most dangerous. Everyone
else, follow me."
Ryson accepted the task with a nod. Without a moment's more hesitation, he was
again down the steps, but now moved quickly out of sight.
Holli took the lead, Lauren at her side. Both trotted quickly down the stairs to the open
road. Five algors with the hoods of their cloaks drawn tightly over their heads followed.
The cliff behemoth, flanked on each side by Matthew and Stephen, bent his head as he
stepped past the door and into the clearing of the open steps.
Gasps of surprise and fright filled the growing crowd. Not a single onlooker stood his
ground. Even the angry men shied away from the sight of the giant. Each quickly
glimpsed about for a sure path of escape in case the creature decided to turn in their
direction. To their relief, Holli guided the group in the opposite direction.
The remaining five algors kept close in behind Dzeb with Jon and Tun following in
their wake. The elder dwarf did not appear happy walking so far back in the line. He kept
his right hand on his axe and glared with menace at the crowd. He would be more than
willing to take out his frustrations upon any human that might try to lay a hand on his
royal person. Lief concluded the line with his bow returned to his shoulder. He allowed a
slight gap to form between him and the rest of the party, a buffer in case the crowd
regained their courage. They never did.
Ryson returned to their ranks and spoke briefly to Holli. He kept his voice to a
whisper as they now walked in the open. After another quick report, the delver again
raced off to scout on ahead.
Word spread through the streets via shouts and cries. With every passing moment of
their travel, more and more townspeople became aware of their presence. Shutters banged
open, and then closed with a shiver of anguish. Children ran towards them, gawking,
before being herded up and whisked away by cringing parents. The clamor revealed their
position as well as if they carried a streaming red banner high over Dzeb's head.
"This will not do," Holli muttered. She searched for a quick solution and appeared to
find one in the growing cluster of buildings before them.
As they moved away from the church, they found themselves closer to the heart of the
town. Homes, taverns and shops were built closer together. Narrow alleys offered
passage away from the growing host of prying eyes. With quick instructions to Ryson,
Holli took every advantage of such offerings. She led them with twists and turns, mostly
down narrow back alleys and away from busy intersections. The din of those that had
gathered soon faded in the distance as Holli's winding path lost any that tried to pursue.
The danger, though, was far from over as total avoidance of detection was nearly
impossible in such a busy town. A merchant mindlessly sweeping dirt from his back
door, or a townsperson passing behind his house witnessed the group with a start and a
scream.
Any dogs, however, remained quiet to their appearance. Those that were loose ran up
to Dzeb, licked his hand, and let them pass without the slightest bark or growl. Those
animals that stood behind windows of their homes simply watched as the group passed,
tails wagging as if a royal welcome. Their stares set happily upon the cliff behemoth.
In the maze of buildings in such a crowded section of town, even Matthew, who spent
his entire life in Connel, became temporarily unaware of their exact position. They
followed Holli almost blindly as she never lost her bearings. She kept them moving
westward, though in round about fashion. To any that watched her, it was clear she never
once lost her direction or sight of her ultimate objective. Her grasp over even this most
unfamiliar of terrains was awe-inspiring. She moved as if she spent twenty seasons in this
town, and spent that time in these very alleys avoiding detection.
Ryson's ability to relocate them was equally as stunning. He used his speed to move
ahead of the group and out of sight. After scouting many directions, he always managed
to find them again without the slightest difficulty. With a brief report to Holli, he was on
his way only to return even after Holli led them through more twists and turns around
several buildings.
In the narrow passages where they moved, his whispered words could now be heard
by others in the party as they all clustered together.
"More horses are arriving," he warned. "They're staying on the wide roads, but they're
checking the alleys. They're mostly listening to calls from the townspeople. Most of them
are false or confused. They haven't established a search pattern. They're simply
wandering about recklessly, hoping to stumble over us. If they keep that up, we have a
chance."
On that note of optimism, he again ran off.
As Holli continued to move them further toward the edge of town, she could now also
hear the galloping hooves of horses. The most audible of shouts shifted from surprised
screams to the barking of orders. The guards were indeed closing on them as their
numbers increased. They came from every direction, but their efforts remained
uncoordinated as individuals moved randomly toward their position.
She turned her head to the party for a brief moment to issue a single warning. "With so
many on horseback, it may be impossible to avoid them completely. Stand ready to
defend, but only on my order." With her words ending in firm command, she turned back
to her duty.
Holli now relied as heavily upon her own training as she did upon the continuous
reports from the delver. With savvy and skill, she zigzagged through the buildings which
stood between them and the open fields to the west. She continuously altered the speed of
the party, sometimes stopping them for long moments in a narrow alley as a horse-backed
rider trotted past. Her skill was rewarded, the ancient wall was now in sight, but with the
wall came greater risk.
The guards were now close enough for them to spot several, but through the grace of
benevolent forces and by the talents of Holli, the party remained unseen. When the road
ahead was clear, they moved at their best possible speed. When Holli was in doubt about
what might lie around the next corner, she slowed them and selected several alternate
routes in case retreat was necessary.
As they closed upon the outskirts of the town, movement became tense and laborious.
Buildings were smattered about haphazardly. The cover of narrow, dark alleys
disappeared into wide vacant lots. One or two elves or delvers might have escaped
detection over such areas, but not a group which included ten algors, two dwarves and a
cliff behemoth. Her concerns doubled as Lauren called out a warning of her own.
"Their leader is with them now," she whispered into Holli's ear, but those around her
heard as well. "He is directing their efforts. Many are being sent to the wall to cut off our
escape. He is close by. I think he knows we want to head west."
The elf guard shook her head with distress, but kept them moving. If men were being
sent to the wall, they would have to beat them there, although she understood such
prospects were dim. Holli actually surpassed her own expectations as they reached within
a stone's throw of the wall before a rider twenty paces from them called out their position.
The party stood beside a large storage facility for grain which came in from the fields.
The building walls were tall, taller than Dzeb, and made of brick. Holli needed only scan
the closest wall in the briefest of moments to know it would not behoove them to be
trapped against it. She immediately sought other options.
In front of them, only a few strides, a wide road drifted off to the west and up a ramp
over the ancient wall. It was the main supply route for farmers to bring their crops to
town. Holli's sharp eyes followed the direct passage out to the western horizon. While it
would lie over open ground between the corn and wheat fields, it would eventually lead
toward wooded areas of sanctuary. She harshly judged its merits with tactical
implications.
The open road would give an advantage to those on horseback. It offered nothing in
the way of cover, but it remained a clear path to the west and ultimately to Sanctum.
There were trees in the distance, trees she and Lief, and Ryson could use to thwart any
attack, but they stood out of reach. She knew the group could not outrun the horse-backed
guards to safety. In her final assessment, the road afforded her little strategic value other
than offering greater space for maneuverability and the slim hope of escape.
Still, these small benefits surpassed that which existed in their current position.
Unwilling to be trapped against the warehouse, Holli quickly ordered everyone to the
middle of the road. They were in the open and away from cover, but free passage
extended in several directions. With a decision made, she turned a critical eye upon her
foes.
As more and more riders rambled toward them, their weaknesses, as well as their illwill, were easily visible to the eyes of a trained elf guard. The men appeared ready for a
skirmish, but not trained enough to use the open ground to their advantage. The circle
they formed was loose and porous. If it became necessary, she and Lief could send
enough arrows to send the lot into utter confusion and spook the horses into uncontrolled
flight. For now, though, she waited with sharp eyes watching every significant move of
those that surrounded her.
Ryson had returned to their ranks, but instead of taking a place next to Holli, he
moved to her far left. Lief noted his positioning and moved slowly to his right. The three
formed the points of a triangle with the rest of the party in between. Ryson kept his sword
sheathed as Holli and Lief kept their bows strapped about their shoulders.
Tense silence gripped the scene until Matthew called out to any rider that would
answer.
"What's going on here? Why are you blocking our way?"
None replied.
"I insist you let us pass," he demanded. "We have done nothing wrong. You have no
right to stop us."
One of the guards, eyeing Dzeb with both fear and awe, called out the first reply.
"You're walkin' around with a monster. After what we've seen, we've ..."
His response was cut short by the slow beat of a horse's trot behind him, and a callous
command. "That will be enough."
Those surrounded by the guards turned their attention to the approaching rider; all
accept Holli, Lief and Ryson. Their focus remained upon the guards which stood closest
to their points of protection.
There were now at least two dozen riders that encircled them. Some had swords in
hand, others had bows with arrows ready. They were surely not bound together by
common training, as they did not allow their greater numbers to work to their advantage.
Their positioning remained lax and disorganized, wide gaps remained in their ranks. They
made no attempt to complement or coordinate their weaponry as those with bows found
themselves clustered together. Those with long swords and best suited to block the escape
routes were also far from optimal position.
The threat, however, lay not in their ability to work together, but in the cold
assumption of their task. Ryson judged them as nothing more than a collection of
mercenaries, hired by the mayor to carry out his own bidding. Unable to recognize a man
before him, he believed they would be willing to carry out any order, no matter how
unjust. The guards looked upon most of the group as nothing more than cattle, and they
would probably treat them all with less compassion. Only the cliff behemoth pulled a
reaction from the men beyond indifference, and that was fear.
The newcomer on horseback moved forward through the ranks of the circled men. He
guided his horse with obvious difficulty, making it clear to all that he was uncomfortable
sitting upon the animal. It was Consprite, and his appearance brought little surprise to all
that had come to know him, especially Mappel.
The elder elf remained quiet as Matthew confronted the mayor first.
"Why have you ordered these men to stop us? You assured us they would assist us."
Consprite shook his head, his slightly pudgy cheeks jiggled, accenting his expression
of impatience. "I assured you they would escort your guests safely to the church, nothing
more. Don't make it sound as if I have broken a promise. That deed has been done by
you. I offered my help and you were to keep me advised of anything which might stir the
people. This morning I hear shouts and screams and now I find you attempting to sneak
out of town. Is that keeping your word? That just won't do. The people are up in arms.
They'll expect an explanation. I now also would like an explanation."
"There is nothing to explain," Mappel joined the debate. He kept his tone calm as he
stepped towards Consprite. "We have done exactly what we told you we were going to
do. We have brought many together at the Church of Godson, we have talked, and now
we must leave."
Consprite brushed his eyebrow with his forefinger. "I assume then you have reached
some consensus. Were you not going to inform me of that decision?"
Mappel responded placidly. His stance, however, was anything but relaxed. His
weight remained evenly upon his feet, his staff balanced in his hands. "It no longer
concerns you."
The mayor would not agree. He spoke with a near mocking tone. "I doubt that's the
case. I would guess it concerns everyone. Isn't that what you told me when we had our
discussion in my office? I was under the impression that whatever was happening was
affecting the entire land. Has that changed?"
"Many things have changed since our first meeting," Mappel said coolly.
"But not that."
"Be that as it may, our business now calls us away from Connel."
"And that's it?" The mayor feigned surprise as he raised his eyebrows. He spoke as if
he could not conceive of such a callous decision. "You would just leave, without
acknowledging my role or my wishes? You are finished with Connel, so you walk away
as if you were never here?" Consprite's voice dripped with sarcasm. "It is not that easy.
There are debts to repay."
"What kind of debts?"
"Debts to me, of course. Your parade will certainly put me in an uncomfortable
position. It may be discovered that I hid your presence from the town. That will not be
looked upon kindly. There are also the escorts I have provided for you."
"The same escorts which now block us?" Matthew asked with an intensity which
loomed ever higher.
Never at a loss for words, the mayor responded with a sharpened tongue. "These men
confronted you because your giant friend there failed to follow the instructions we agreed
upon. I was to help your guests reach the church and you would keep from causing a
panic in the streets. I'm sure you saw the commotion you caused. What were my men
supposed to do? Ignore it? No, I'm afraid not. If you are upset by what has occurred, it is
your own fault. It also appears as if some of your other guests were unwilling to take
advantage of my escorts." His eyes first washed over the giant, but they soon found the
dwarves. Their hardened faces stared back at him as he noted their peculiar features. The
hoods of the algors hid their faces from him, but their appearance was already reported to
him. He nodded to Jon and Tun. "It seems there are other interesting things that you wish
to keep hidden from me. These two I assume are dwarves. They've entered this town
without my knowledge. Another breach of our agreement. Are they going to accompany
you to Sanctum?"
The question hung in the air even as Consprite waited with triumphant glee. He drank
in their surprise, especially that of the elder elf.
"What do you know of Sanctum?" Mappel asked, no longer hiding his contempt for
the man.
"I know a great many things you probably wish I didn't." He paused to pull an item
from his pocket. He held it aloft for all to see the weather beaten cover of a book in which
dust had actually become embedded. To Matthew and Stephen, the book was
immediately recognizable. "It was hard to obtain a copy of a Book of Godson. Not many
people have one. Luckily the library archived a copy. I doubt it has been looked at in
years."
At first Consprite smiled at the reactions of Matthew and Stephen. He reveled in his
victory until he placed an icy stare upon the elder elf. "This book has revealed a great
many things to me. I believe I know what you are after. It's this Sphere of Ingar, isn't it?
It would explain a great many things to me. I imagine you're going to Sanctum Mountain
to try and stop the magic which you believe is now free. Let me ask you this, does it still
contain poison for the elves?"
"It will contain poison for all," Mappel snarled.
"I don't know about that, but it does contain great power. I want to know what you
intend to do with it. What are your plans when you reach Sanctum?"
"That does not concern you."
"It does, if I don't let you leave."
"Again I demand to know by what right you hold us." Matthew growled, his cheeks
turning red with anger.
Consprite nearly laughed at the reaction. "Do you think with all that is going on I have
to answer such a question? You talk as if there's someone I have to answer to. That
simply isn't the case. No one would fault me for throwing all of you in prison, especially
if they found out who and what you are. The people of this town will be very upset to
know that monsters were hiding in that church of yours. What do you think they will do
when their courage grows? I bet they'll consider burning that church right down to the
ground. If I'm not around to keep order, it will surely happen. Now, I can be persuaded to
keep a guard over your church, and allow you to pass, but it will take much more of your
cooperation."
"More likely you mean that if we don't do as you say, you'll see that it's done,"
Matthew roared with anger. "I am not so blinded by my faith that I can't see a threat. If
there is any burning to be done, I'm sure you'll be at the heart of it."
Consprite snickered, then acted to appear hurt, as if wounded by the barb. "You do me
injustice. I have been on your side all along. It is the townspeople that will take the
action. Mobs are an angry and unmanageable lot."
"What of the spies?"
The mayor looked about to find the source of the question. His eyes narrowed upon
Lauren, her face a mixture of uncertainty as well as challenge.
"Do I know you?" the mayor wondered aloud.
Lauren hesitated only for a moment before her voice boomed with new found
confidence. "I doubt it, but I know you, more now than ever, probably more than you
would ever believe. I live in this town. I know that the people would not simply burn
anything without prodding from the likes of you."
She stepped toward him. Her eyes locked upon him, bore through his outward shell.
Any hint of her trepidation evaporated as she saw into the caverns of his conniving,
greedy soul. "I also know of the spies you placed around the church to watch us. I read
you as easily as a tavern sign." Indeed, Lauren's eyes glowed with new found power and
they uncovered the mayor's deepest thoughts and intentions. "The escorts, the spies, even
your intentions now. I see them all. Tell them what you really want, mayor. End this
charade. You want the sphere for yourself. You want to unravel its secrets and learn to
tap into its power. You have a twisted soul, Consprite. You would kill us all, even these
guards that now serve you if it meant truly grasping this power."
"Nonsense,”
Lauren cut him off before he could continue. Her words fiery hot, the power which
was now hers to command coursing through her spirit. "Save your lie. I hear it ringing in
your head before you say the words. You were going to say you only want to help, that
you would accompany us to Sanctum with some of your men at our side. You would
leave men here and at the church to keep peace."
The mayor's eyes widened with surprise. "Who are you?" he asked again. "How did
you know what I was going to say?"
"Does it matter, because I also know you lie. You will use the guards to take the
sphere when the time is right."
At first, Consprite did not reply. He merely sat uncomfortably upon his horse,
considering his options. Finally, he spoke with cold expression and bitter words. "Be that
as it may, you have little choice. If you wish to proceed to Sanctum Mountain, you must
allow me to accompany you. Otherwise I will not let you leave."
Neither Mappel nor Matthew reacted first, nor did Lauren. Before they could say a
single word in response, a reply came from an unexpected source within their very midst.
It came in the form of the smallest action, without a word of bravado.
Very placidly, very deliberately, the cliff behemoth took a step. His calm blue eyes
gazed off down the road to the west. He spoke not a word. Gently, he placed a hand upon
an algor's shoulder and made it clear he wished to pass. He took another step and his
direction was now clear, he would leave Connel whether Consprite allowed it or not. In
truth, he moved as if the guards and Consprite were no longer there. Every eye was now
on him. Even Holli allowed a glance over her shoulder to catch a glimpse of the giant's
movements. None followed as all remained in place, yet Dzeb moved forward as if
nothing mattered.
"What's that thing doing?" Consprite demanded, but a hint of fear broke through his
words.
Mappel did not answer. No one did. They simply watched as Dzeb strode up to the
horse backed riders that blocked the western pass of the road. The horses reared back and
the surprised, cautious guards allowed them to do so. With silent, peaceful grace, as if
walking through an empty park at sunrise, Dzeb stepped past the circle of riders. Nothing
now stood between him and the ramp which passed over the ancient wall.
Consprite shook the confusion from his thoughts. Anger swelled in him as he watched
the cliff behemoth walk past his guards as if they did not exist.
"Stop him!" he ordered.
Nearly every guard waited motionless for another to take up the task. Finally, one
bowman at the edge of the road decided to act. He fired a single arrow at the back right
shoulder of the giant. It sliced through the air with perfect precision and met its mark
with pinpoint accuracy, though the result was most unanticipated by the bowman.
The steel tip of the arrow, razor sharp, failed to penetrate Dzeb's body. A small fleck
of his hide skipped away from his back, but that was the extent of his injury. The arrow
fared much worse. The steel-tipped arrowhead flattened as the shaft shattered. Small
splinters of wood rained everywhere as Dzeb stopped moving.
He turned with patience, back towards the circle of men. His eyes betrayed the sorrow
in his heart as he stood gazing at the guard with the empty bow still in his hand. For that
man, all eternity passed in a single heartbeat.
With his eyes growing sadder by the moment, Dzeb reversed his direction and stepped
more forcibly towards the bowman. The other men clustered about this marked guard
guided their horses back and away. The bowman stood alone and too frightened to direct
his horse toward an escape.
Dzeb mouthed a word loud and clear. Its meaning was lost on all that watched, except
for the horses. At once they calmed, and not one animal let loose even a single whinny.
Even the horse upon which the bowman sat, waited patiently for Dzeb as he stepped ever
closer. If the bowman kicked the horse with all his might, it would not move the mare an
inch.
Dzeb reached out. His mammoth hand extended slowly outward. First, it found the
snout of the horse. He patted it gently. The mare closed its eyes as if calmed to sleep. The
gray hand of the behemoth, with powerful fingers extended, moved onward and reached
out toward the guard. Dzeb closed his palm around the bow and lifted it deliberately from
the guard's grip. He held the weapon over empty ground as he tightened his fist. The
center of the bow crumbled, the taut string went limp, the remnants dropped to the
ground as harmless as dust.
Consprite watched first the giant, but then the faces of all those around him. He saw
the panic rise in his men and smiles of satisfaction appear upon Mappel and his followers.
Anger swelled within him, and he growled though gritted teeth. "Use your swords you
fools! Stop him!"
Those men that found the strength to overcome their fear drew their weapons, but their
horses would not move as they directed. They shouted and kicked, but the animals
remained in place, as if the horses were nothing more than stone statues.
In that moment of utter chaos, it was the algors that acted, and as was customary, they
moved in unison. Ten slings appeared with ten rounded stones in place. The swinging
bands cut the air and the stones fired simultaneously. Ten separate targets were selected,
and ten guards fell to the ground.
Ryson, Holli, and Lief moved with almost the same precision. With delver agility,
Ryson leapt upon the closest rider. He knocked the guard from his perch on the saddle
and sent him sprawling to the ground. He leapt off that horse and on to a second, again
sending the rider flying. He dismounted four riders with ease, two remained unconscious
upon the ground, and the other two ran swiftly to safety. The horses remained in place as
if nothing had happened.
Lief drew his sword. As guards tried to move their horses, he slapped them hard on
the wrists with the blunt edge. Their swords or bows dropped harmlessly to the ground as
he disarmed three before a fourth was prepared to duel with him from an unmoving
horse. While the guard had the advantage of height from the saddle, he could not
maneuver. Lief quickly moved in from behind and with a sword point at the man's neck,
forced submission.
Holli took her bow from her shoulder but at first left the arrows in their quiver. She
grasped one end of the bow with both hands as she heaved it back. With great force she
swung at the nearest rider. The thick wooden bow struck the guard's chest. He flew
backwards out of the saddle and landed upon the ground dazed, if not seriously hurt.
Again, the horse remained unmoving. It showed no sign of distress as Holli jumped on its
back.
Firmly in the saddle, Holli finally drew an arrow. She readied it in the bow string and
pulled back with steady force. She kept her grip on the string as she called for Consprite's
attention.
"Tell your men to disarm, now!" The arrow pointed unmistakably at the mayor's
throat. "It will be a painful way to die," she urged.
Consprite's face turned gray, then white. The female elf's resolve was not a matter of
question. Had he hesitated, she would have let the arrow fly.
"Do as she said!" he yelled, but the words blurted from his mouth in more of a yelp.
"Now have them dismount!" Holli's hands remained steady upon her bow, the string
remained taught.
"Do it!" he instructed, and those that remained in their saddles dropped to the ground.
"You too," she gave her last command.
The mayor struggled to move as quickly as possible. He cursed, his face glowed red
once more with both fear and embarrassment. At first, he could not decide how to remove
himself from the perch of the saddle. He looked to his left, then his right. He pulled up
his right leg, shook his head in alarm over falling, and changed to his left. Finally, he
struggled and fumbled his way out of the saddle. His right foot would not clear the stirrup
and he ended up on his backside. He cursed again, and went to lift himself out of the dirt
covered road.
"I think you should stay there," Holli advised. She lowered the tension on the bow
string, but the arrow remained in place.
Consprite bit back an angry retort, and remained on the seat of his pants. His horse
stood placidly by him. It made no movements as Mappel stepped up to grab its reins.
Mappel considered the horse before him, just as he swerved his head about to consider
the many other animals within his grasp. An idea of their service leaped into his mind.
"Dare I say, that again providence has intervened," he spoke gently, but all could hear
him. "Is it luck or a turn of fate that we now have the means to reach Sanctum before
nightfall?"
Holli joined in immediately. "The horses would give us a great advantage. We would
not have to make a single camp. We could stay on the roads along the farms and bypass
the human towns between Connel and the mountain." Her mind calculated the entire
journey which lay before them. She posed a question to herself as well as the entire
group. "But what of the thickening forest? The horses will slow us when we reach Dark
Spruce."
Mappel shook his head serenely. "They might slow us, if you simply refer to the elves
and perhaps the delver. You must now, however, think with greater scope. The horses
will help those that can not walk within the trees, such as Matthew here, and Stephen, and
our good friends the algors and dwarves."
"I considered that from the start," Holli corrected him quickly but politely. "I wonder
more about when the trees thicken and block most passages. What about paths in the
forest that prove too narrow for the horses?"
"We could head northwest," Ryson called out the suggestion. "We could pass through
the edges of Dark Spruce and then cut south to approach Sanctum. We would lose a little
time in the beginning by not heading due west, but we would make it up and more as we
close in. Besides, if the path is too narrow for a horse, then I doubt it would be wide
enough for Dzeb."
Holli seized upon the last statement, still unsure if taking the horses would give them a
true advantage. "That is another point. What horse here can carry the cliff behemoth
without collapsing after a minute’s ride? Would it truly help us to leave a trail of
exhausted animals?"
"There's a cart at the front of that building," Lief asserted as he pointed to the
warehouse. "If we hitch two of the horses to the cart, they could carry Dzeb with ease."
Holli nodded in agreement. "That would solve most problems, though we would have
to leave the cart at the base of Sanctum. Dzeb would have to climb on foot."
"I expect all of us will at that point," Ryson acknowledged. "After a full day’s ride
with little rest, none of these horses will be in any condition to take a slope as steep as
Sanctum's. The important thing is that we will reach the mountain before night falls."
Dzeb interrupted the discussion with a point seemingly overlooked by the elves. "If
you are talking about taking these horses, I would have to decline for other reasons." His
voice was melodic, but no less firm. "These horses do not belong to us. No matter what
these men have done, it would not be right for us to take them. The cart also does not
belong to us."
"I'm sure this man won't object to giving us his horses, would you?" Holli's tone did
not hide the edge of a threat. Her hand still held the bow as the tip of the arrow again bore
down upon Consprite's throat.
Dzeb maintained his serene yet unshakable tone. "I can not accept that, either. I can
understand what we have done here to this point, for in truth we have done no harm. To
threaten and steal is another matter. I can not, will not, be a part of that."
Lief could not hold his tongue. "You would risk the land for the sake of these men that
were willing to slaughter us all?! Fire upon you and your Book of Godson! There are
times we must do what we have to in order to survive. Taking these horses would be no
different than you crushing that guard’s bow."
"I already regret that action," Dzeb replied with more than a twinge of sadness. "It
was, however, necessary."
"As taking the horses is necessary!"
"We have other choices," the cliff behemoth reminded the elf with no hostility in his
voice.
"Fire upon you and your other choices."
"Wait a minute, what if we pay for the horses?" Ryson quickly asked while walking
up to the cliff behemoth. "What if we pay for the cart as well? We would simply be
acquiring what we need for the trip by totally acceptable methods. Would that be alright
with you?"
Dzeb did not protest. "It is stealing I am against."
"Very well, then." Ryson turned and trotted toward Consprite. He first looked about
him to ensure the count of the party. "I will need twenty-one of these horses."
"They're not for sale," Consprite snarled.
Ryson was not shaken for a moment. "Oh but they are. You see I had a bargain with
the town council, of which you belong. I'm sure you remember. I was to scout out towns
to check the damage of the quake. I was paid only half when I started out. I was to be
paid the other half when I returned. Well, here I am, and I want my payment."
"The town council no longer exists," Consprite replied with irritation flooding his
voice.
"But you are here and acting as mayor. That makes you responsible. Do you have my
money?"
The mayor said nothing.
"I didn't think so. Therefore you have broken your end of the bargain, but I am willing
to make a deal. I will take twenty-one of these horses now. In return, I will forget your
debt as well as return to you the entire portion of the initial payment." Ryson flipped a
bag of gold coins in to the lap of the mayor. "That bag contains more than I was given
when I took on your job, I expect you to give the difference to the owner of that cart.
More than fair."
The delver turned and looked toward Dzeb. "The horses are rightfully ours, do you
agree?"
Dzeb nodded and gave a warm smile. "It is the will of Godson."


Lief and Ryson hitched the warehouse cart to two of the stronger horses. Upon
completion, Ryson guided the cliff behemoth to the cart's front where he could hold the
reins. The axles creaked and groaned under the giant's weight, but they would hold.
Ryson leapt upon a chestnut stallion and motioned for the others to follow suit. The
horses remained motionless, as if in the deepest of sleeps, and each of the group had little
difficulty in reaching a saddle. Even Tun and Jon, both forced to hoist themselves higher
than their short legs would allow, found it easy to mount a horse which stood as still as a
stone.
Dzeb mouthed another indiscernible word, a word with no meaning to any there, save
the horses. The animals stirred immediately. Some fussed and reared as if startled from a
dream. Their new riders took firm grip of the reins and reassured their mounts with pats
on the neck and soothing words.
"I guess we should move along," Ryson suggested as he nudged his horse forward.
The party left the mayor and his guards behind as they took to the road leading west.
Only Holli looked back. Her vision swept across every guard, watching them all,
especially those with bows. Her own bow remained in her hand. She held it up ever so
slightly when her eyes locked with Consprite's. Her message was clear. If he tried to
follow, cliff behemoth or no cliff behemoth, she would pierce him through the throat.
With the continuous beating of horse hooves, the mayor and his mercenaries soon
dropped from sight. The spirits of the wayward travelers lifted as the sun hung brightly
overhead. Warm rays filled the air. Trees, flowers, and the growing crops fed upon the
light, reaching higher toward the sky. Birds chattered off in the distance, some simply
ignoring the scattered scarecrows as they swooped down upon ripening fields of grain.
The promise of this gorgeous day, however, would not last. A growing wind from the
west brought attention to thickening clouds on the horizon and cooled the air enough to
allow the algors and dwarves to maintain their cloaks about them. No true surprise, for all
but perhaps the dwarves knew that the growing season produced quick moving storms.
Even the algors in the Lacobian Desert witnessed small squalls during this time in the
cycle. It was the one season when even a desert could feel the cooling spray of rainfall.
The wind swirled dust from the roads, as did the hooves of the horses, and their
movements took on a new sense of urgency. The swelling overhead clouds pressed the
riders forward. The quicker they could reach their destination, the faster they could find
shelter. It was thus they sat in saddle with even greater thanks, even as they looked
behind to see the fading structures of Connel. They could never have hoped to cover so
much distance in so little time. At the very least, they would reach the cover of trees in
Dark Spruce before the heavy rains fell upon them. It was as Mappel and Dzeb suggested
- a true blessing these horses, perhaps even a gift of Godson.
As Holli led them, she thought the reader would be the first to object to a strenuous
pace. He appeared as much out of place upon horseback as did the mayor. To her
surprise, he moved along without a grunt of dissatisfaction. So did they all, seemingly
willing to go even faster if it would bring them to their destination before the heavy rains
began.
Holli took advantage of such willingness, setting a pace faster than she could have
expected but within the constraints of the horses. She would test their endurance without
leading them to the brink of exhaustion. The horses that pulled Dzeb proved to be the
measuring stick. As they grew tired, she slowed them all to a trot until they were again
ready for a more strenuous run.
While Holli remained in the lead for the duration of the trip, it was Ryson that truly
directed them. It was at this time that the delver's true skills became evident to even the
most unwilling believer. On countless occasions, Ryson actually dismounted and ran off
on foot. He left the reins of his horse in the hands of Holli as he set off forward, or to the
right, or to the left. He moved at a speed that easily surpassed the guarded gallops of the
horses. He disappeared over hilltops only to return within moments to announce what lay
ahead. He would leap back upon his moving horse with casual ease to converse with
Holli. He kept her advised of travelers on the road, or farmers in nearby fields. Never
winded from these excursions, he spent as much time scouting as he did riding.
Occasionally, he brought back a pocketful of wild fruit which he passed out to his
grateful yet amazed companions.
Ryson was well acquainted with the hills in this outlying area. He knew these roads
with intimacy, knew the land like a lover knows the expression of his companion. These
hills were his own, with or without the newly arrived magic.
He directed the group to the northeast and over the most passable, yet isolated
countryside. It was not a straight path that would lead them to Sanctum, but a cut first to
the north, to avoid the neighboring towns of Burbon and Pinesway.
They stayed on the open dirt roads, though they chose turns at Ryson's direction. Most
times they avoided all passer-bys. Occasionally, an encounter with a farmer by the side of
the road or a traveling merchant was unavoidable. Rather than waste time trying to elude
them, Holli accepted the consequences and moved onward directly past.
None of those that witnessed the party made a single comment. Most stood aghast at
the sight of the cliff behemoth, standing regally in the warehouse cart. Some farmers ran
off, back to their houses or barns and watched from a safe distance to ensure the group
did not linger by their property. One merchant nearly drove his own cart off the road into
a ditch. Only by pulling his team to a complete halt did he avert disaster. He sat on top of
his cart stunned, looking back over his shoulders at the passing menagerie.
As the span of travel passed, the clouds thickened overhead. The sun was now
invisible to them, hidden behind rolling purple clouds that swept across the sky faster
than the wind that brushed their faces. The crisp shadows of noon disappeared with the
sun, and the encompassing clouds brought the color of dusk even at this stage of midday.
Sporadic raindrops carried by the wind had them all guessing when the steady rains
would begin.
The passing land became more and more isolated, the road less kept. Carefully
managed plots of planted wheat or corn turned into endless stretches of untouched fields
where tall grass flourished. Wild flowers greeted them at first, but soon most closed their
petals in anticipation of the coming rain. Weeds grew from the center of the dirt lane,
rocks and holes appeared more regularly and as much in their path as upon the sides of
the road. The number of travelers and roadside farmers dwindled to nothing.
The hills became steeper ahead as Ryson turned them to the southwest. They were
now far enough north to avoid contact with even the outer limits of Burbon's farmland,
and it allowed Ryson to draw a direct bead upon Sanctum. Its peak was not yet visible to
them, but his delver senses allowed him to focus upon it as if it were right before him.
They would avoid the growing inclines of the mountains ahead by cutting through the
sliver of forest that separated Sanctum from these lands.
A gleam grew in each of the elves' eyes as the first true signs of Dark Spruce formed
on the horizon. These were no scattered saplings set as markers for farmers. The growing
clusters of trees rose tall and proud. At first sight, gaps appeared, created by the axe of
the budding farm population, but soon, even these disappeared. To the south and to the
west, the trees thickened, claiming this land as their own and defying all who might try to
raze them.
The clouds now covered the entire sky, but other than a few droplets, the rain stayed
away. The wind blew stronger and shuffled the leaves of the trees which now surrounded
them. Holli followed Ryson's directions and kept the party moving through sparser
sections of the forest where paths proved wide enough for the Dzeb's cart to pass. Still,
enough cover of branches and leaves existed overhead to prevent a drenching if the
constant rain did finally arrive.
Ryson continued his scouting activity. He did so now, however, with greater care. He
no longer looked for the farmer or the merchant, but for obstacles created by the wild
tainted magic. His own encounters with the undead, with goblins, and with vampire
burned fresh in his mind. He finished the final leg of the journey completely on foot,
allowing Holli to lead his horse. He watched, smelled and listened for any sign of danger,
or of a scent he could not recognize.
He asked Holli to slow the pace to allow him to completely circle the group in order to
prevent an ambush from the rear. She agreed reluctantly but the speed in which they
reached this point allowed her the luxury of such care. Even if they slowed to a walk,
they would reach the base of Sanctum before nightfall. With the delver's agility, they
could maintain a casual trot and still allow him the chance to scout all directions before
they stumbled upon something unawares.
The rest of the party remained at ease, even in the thickening forest. They found
security, even comfort in Holli's careful guidance and in Ryson's unquestionable skills.
As they witnessed the delver circling the party and on guard for even the slightest hint of
danger, any doubts or fears simply evaporated. If there was a threat, they knew they
would be warned far in advance, and that any pitfall would be avoided. It was only at the
first sight of Sanctum that this calm confidence began to dissolve.
Through the trees, they could all see the peak, and soon enough, even the side of this
hollow mountain. In the backdrop of a gray and purple sky, with the wind blowing steady
from the west, the reality of what they yet faced stung their consciousness just as sleet
falls in the dormant season.
The peak called to their attention as if a glowing beacon in a night sky. Those that
would actually enter Sanctum, as well as those that accompanied them, found themselves
searching their souls for inner strength and determination. Elves, dwarves, algors, and
humans alike; they all knew the desperate facts of their dilemma. It wore upon their spirit
as rough pine needles would scrape upon raw skin.
They were to enter a place that was constructed to defy entry. They were to pass
obstacles older than the ways of life they had grown accustomed. If ever a prospect
appeared out of reach, it was indeed the Sphere of Ingar. This was no simple quest, no
pioneer adventure. This was history, legends, evil and magic rolled into one unyielding
task. Even the delver's spirit, his desire to uncover truths long hidden, was squelched by
the enormity, by the unquestionable magnitude of their final aim. Sanctum was a
monument to the impossible, to what was not meant to be. Yet this handful of travelers
moved onward to conquer the impossible, driven by the belief that it was theirs to
overcome. This, and only this, pressed them forward and brought them all to Sanctum's
base.
Holli dismounted and met Ryson on foot. She requested a full scout of the perimeter
surrounding the mountain's base. If something hid on the other side, she would know of it
before they ventured forward. To the others, she directed them to bring their horses to a
cluster of trees. Each rider dismounted and tethered their animal to a branch or tree trunk
and waited patiently as Holli quietly scanned the area. Her darting eyes covered every
direction in an instant. With equal speed, she decided upon her strategy.
"It is not wise to bring the entire group up the mountain. There is little shelter from the
storm. Only those that will ultimately enter Sanctum must make the climb. The others
should stay here."
Mappel responded with a doubtful eye. He spoke with a quicker tongue than was his
norm, and with an agitated tone. "You would have us wait here? Is that truly wise? I think
it might be more valuable for us to accompany you. We can wait at the entrance, make
sure you gain entry. We would also be there to see you return. There is also the matter of
Shayed. I believe she awaits us. She may have something important to offer all of us."
Holli's face held no expression. Sharp eyes continued to dart about the forest even as
she replied to Mappel with a monotone voice. "I will accept whatever decision you make,
but I would ask you to carefully consider why you might make such a decision. Is it truly
to benefit our cause or is it to allow you a chance to see Shayed? We will not be able to
use the horses in this climb. The eight algors, Matthew, and even yourself, would have to
climb on foot. There is no doubt in my mind the added number would slow our ascent.
Once we reach the summit and point of entry, what is it that you would hope to
accomplish? Would you simply mull about in the open during this storm waiting for our
return? Do we even know how long that might be?"
Mappel turned even more introspective than ever. He pondered the truth behind his
desires. Realizing that there was much validity in Holli's words, he abdicated his position.
"You are correct." His voice was hollow and sorrowful. "We can do little for you now.
We will stay here. With Matthew's assistance and that of the remaining algors, I shall
build a shelter from branches and leaves. It is a wise decision."
Sensing the sorrow in the elder elf, Holli offered a conciliatory option. "There is no
reason you can not climb Sanctum after the storm is over. Perhaps even before midnight,
the sky will be clear. You could rest now and begin your climb then. You could do so at
your own leisure without worrying how you might slow the progress of those that must
enter. If Shayed has a message, I will ask her to repeat it to you upon your arrival. Would
that be satisfactory?"
"More than satisfactory," Mappel replied with a warming smile. He appeared as if
youth was returning to his frail form.
With a decision made, Holli's tone returned to that of stern caution. "I will ask that you
all remain alert both here and upon Sanctum. If goblins are infesting Dark Spruce, they
might attack at any time. When climbing Sanctum, take even greater care. The stone will
become slick with the rain. The ropes we use, we shall leave for your climb as well. Use
them and remain patient. If you fall and are injured, there will be no way for us to help
you."
All ten algors responded immediately. "Do not concern yourself with possible injuries
from falling. We are again blessed with the power of healing. Nearly all the knowledge is
returning slowly."
Holli turned toward them with a questioning stare. "Are you all of equal ability in this
matter?"
They responded separately, talking one after the other, sometimes speaking over
another's words.
"No."
"Some have greater ability."
"We each have some of the knowledge."
"The delver picked us that way."
"Those that could not heal were not picked by the delver."
"I have shown the greatest power."
At that, Holli held up her hand to stop them. Their chatter ended as if Holli held their
mouths shut. She nodded to the last to speak.
"You have displayed the greatest power?"
"Yes," the single algor answered.
Though it was near impossible for most to distinguish one algor from another, Holli
made it a point to do so. During her escort of them from the desert to Connel, she noted
the smallest differences. She examined such slight characteristics as the distance between
the eyes, the length of their arms, the number of purple spots on their heads, and the hue
of the yellow that colored their chests. With such an eye for detail, she was able to
distinguish individuals from the ten. "You were also selected by Ryson to be one of the
two to enter Sanctum." She looked back at Mappel as if to punctuate a hidden meaning in
the selection.
A gleam rose in the elder elf's eye. "More providence."
The cliff behemoth's voice rolled softly over them all. "As I have said, it is the will of
Godson."
Stephen and Matthew beamed, and even Holli allowed a smile to cross her lips.
It lasted but a heartbeat, for her face quickly became as stern as it would ever become.
The time was near for their ascent of Sanctum, but one last preparation was required. Her
eyes stopped checking for signs of danger about them as she fastened them upon Mappel.
Her words held the importance of what she was about to request. "It is time you reveal
what the elves placed in Sanctum and how we might overcome it."
Mappel looked at his staff and then at the ground. Strange. He had been so willing to
speak of the secret, so willing to release it in hopes that others might do the same. In his
heart, ending the secrets meant breaking the bonds of the separation. It would represent
the key to defeating Sanctum, the sphere, and the tainted magic that spread its curse
across the land. But now, now that the time had truly come, he regretted having to speak
of it. His lips became tight, as if he needed to consciously force them to mouth his words.
"So it is," he spoke with a pained tongue. He could say nothing more until he guided
Lief and Holli to privacy. They spoke for long moments in guarded whispers.
Lief and Holli made no reaction. They listened intently with focus and concentration.
The woods themselves seemed to grow still, and even the wind appeared to silence
during this moment of revelation.
Ryson returned from his mission. He immediately noted the overtones of silence. He
did not disturb the conference of the elves. He remained in the midst of the others and
quietly whispered that all appeared calm.
The three elves turned as Mappel ended his instruction. Lief and Holli moved with the
same resolve that brought them to this point, but a thread of gloom hung ever so slightly
upon their faces. Some of their spark had faded, and even Holli's eyes revealed a hint of
weariness. She attempted to swallow this gloom and fatigue when she again faced the
entire group. She was only marginally successful.
"We must move at once," she ordered. "We have done well to reach this point with so
much light left in the day. We have been lucky the rain has held to a drizzle. I will not
push this luck. Ryson, what is the situation surrounding us?"
"No sign of trouble," he announced.
"Lauren, do you sense anything in these woods?"
The young, budding sorceress cringed, stiffened herself as if she expected pain to
erupt through her body. She closed her eyes and stood motionless. Her forehead wrinkled
with tension. "There is nothing I sense in the woods, but something waits for us above. It
isn't alive but it isn't dead either." She opened her eyes with a start. "I can't tell you what
it is."
"It is probably Shayed," Lief noted.
"Probably, but not certainly," Holli said with her usual caution. "We shall remain
prepared for something worse. As for those that remain here, leave guards during the
night at each direction. You will not have the delver here to alert you, but a poor set of
eyes is better than no sight at all."
She examined the own bag at her waist and ordered the others to do the same. "Check
your supplies for water and food, we have no idea how long we will be inside." Upon
completion of this check, she gave Ryson the sign to begin the climb. "Choose a wise
path, Ryson. Remember those that follow do not have your skills and the stone grows
slick with the rain. Lief and I carry long strands of rope as well do you. Let us use them."
"Understood."
"Do you believe we can make the top before nightfall? Keep in mind the thickening
clouds will limit the light after sunset. There will be little dusk."
Ryson shot a glance up the slope. He spoke as he analyzed the mountainside. "I think
so. With the extra rope, I should be able to leave a fairly easy path." He checked the sky,
but the clouds blocked the true location of the sun. "I'm just not certain how much useful
light we have left."
"Then let us not waste any of it," Holli stated firmly and she began moving towards
the first incline ahead of them.
Ryson acknowledged the need for urgency and bounded past her. In mere moments,
he was scampering far up the mountainside. He anchored his first rope roughly a quarter
of the distance up. After securing one end, he unfurled it and brought the opposite end
down to Holli. He relieved her of the second rope and darted back up the mountain as if
running on a level plane.
At an additional third of the way towards the summit, Ryson prepared the second
rope. It covered the most difficult portion of the mountain. The inclines were steepest at
the center, and there were fewer footholds. The rope would allow even the humans to
climb without hesitation. After obtaining the third rope from Lief, Ryson moved ahead to
set the last stage of the climb. Darkness began to spread as the invisible sun drifted lower
behind the clouds. The rain increased to a steady drizzle. The dark and wet ground would
slow travel for all but the delver, whose eyes were even now adjusting to the dim light.
As he hastened past Holli for the final leg of the journey, she called out a warning.
"Remember Lauren's sight. Something awaits us at the top. Do not foolishly move into
a trap. Wait for us before you proceed to the point where you met Shayed."
Ryson accepted the order without disagreement. He moved swiftly but alertly toward
the top of the mountain. He chose a platform just below the summit. He stood quietly
with a watchful eye. He unfurled the final rope and swung it down to the waiting party.
Near total darkness enveloped them as the final member reached the platform where the
delver waited.
"Just up that pass and right above us is the leveling where we met Shayed," Ryson
whispered.
"I want you to move up first, but move swiftly," Holli requested. She then turned to
the giant cliff behemoth. "If you will Dzeb, I would like you to follow the delver. You are
the least vulnerable of us. The delver's speed and your size might catch any would-be
attacker off guard, if indeed such an ambush awaits. I would guess it is simply Shayed's
presence that Lauren senses, but I wish to take no chances."
"Understood," Dzeb said warmly. The giant's lips curled upwards, the rock hard skin
softening around his mouth to form a light smile. It was a wonder to see. "I will move
forward with care, but with the grace of Godson, I am sure that nothing will keep us from
His will."
Holli acknowledged Dzeb's cooperation with a respectful bow of the head. "I will
follow behind, but I will remain under the cover of this ledge until I can assess any
threat."
Without further word, the three moved. Ryson's figure cut through the darkness of
night. He scrambled up the rambling path and was soon far beyond the cliff behemoth.
His eyes captured even the slightest glimmer of light as he rushed onward. He broke over
the pass at full speed and darted across the leveling, taking in everything at once.
Dzeb climbed more deliberately. He handled the rocky slope with agility which
seemed impossible for his size and physical structure. His powerful, thick legs moved as
effortlessly over the incline as the delver's, although at a much slower pace. In truth, he
was at home in these surroundings, as all cliff behemoths sought the lonely sanctuary of
desolate ridges and sharp rocky terrain. It allowed them the solitude to reflect upon the
teachings of their faith. It allowed them a peaceful and tranquil setting away from those
that have forgotten the word and the way.
He continued moving without pause. If he worried over what might wait overhead, he
showed no sign. Dzeb's height almost allowed him to see over the ledge that beckoned
them. With but a few paces upon the incline, his head was over the precipice and all the
flat clearing was now available to him.
Holli moved up close behind the giant. She lifted her ear to catch sounds of a
skirmish. Nothing which indicated an ambush broke through the angry rushes of the
blowing wind. Her elfin eyes also allowed her greater sight at night, though not to the
extent of the delver's. As soon as possible, she lifted her head beyond the limit of the
ledge and peered upon the summit.
Ryson caught the sight of Shayed first. Her white transparent form appeared dimmer
to him. He would have expected her to glow with greater brilliance in this darkness, but
he was not of the knowledge of spirits to know how they might appear in any
circumstance. He said nothing to her at first. Even as the spirit's eyes fixed upon him, he
continued moving about the leveled peak. He examined everything at once, looking for
signs of any new danger. Aware now of such things as mountain shags and vampires, he
scoured the ground and behind every boulder large enough to hide the smallest of
goblins. He found nothing unusual or out of place. As he turned toward the translucent
form of Shayed, he noted the upcoming presence of Dzeb as well as the top of Holli's
head peaking over the ledge.
"It's safe," he called to the elf guard. "Bring everyone up."
Nothing was said further until the last of the party reached the summit. They all stood
about Shayed with wondering eyes, save Ryson and Lief who had spoken with the spirit
before. Like a smoldering, glowing white ember, the ghostly figure stood out from the
darkness.
Lief announced their arrival in hushed respectful tones. "We have returned, Shayed,
and we have brought those who must enter Sanctum." He introduced them one by one as
the spiritual figure of Shayed remained silent.
The spirit finally spoke after the last member of the party came forward.
"I have little energy to help you," the ghostly apparition began. "The magic is draining
my own ability to remain with you. I have little power to speak so I will tell you but one
thing. You must not destroy the sphere within the mountain. To do so would guarantee
your own deaths. The mountain would surely crumble upon you and the release of so
much energy within the mountain may damage the land irreparably. You must bring it
back to me, here at the top of Sanctum. Only in this free space will we see to the
destruction of the sphere. I wish you luck in your journey. I only wish I could have been
of greater service. Time is short, you must enter in all haste."
Ryson noted her voice was harsher than their first meeting. Even her eyes lacked the
warmth of when they last spoke. They seemed to burn with the hint of red fire, a glow he
did not recall upon their first meeting. He could not surmise that the true eyes of Shayed
watched in anguish behind an invisible prison.
The elfin sorceress stood right beside them, but though she tried mightily, all attempts
to gain their attention failed. Only the human female seemed to catch a faint whisper in
the wind, but the sight of the disguised spirit pulled at Lauren's attention. Shayed fought
against the chains, fought against the prison, fought against the spell that hid and silenced
her. No one would see her struggle, no one would hear her pleas.
It was the prince dwarf Jon Folarok that immediately took heed of the imposter's
request and began to work. "The dwarf tier awaits us first, but first we must gain entry. I
will handle that, if that is alright with you my brother."
"No one is better suited," Tun responded, showing a far greater degree of respect for
his brother than normal. Tun was well aware of Jon's abilities in the art of tunneling and
even the elder prince's own defiant will couldn't blind him to this truth.
Jon looked about the ground for a moment. "I am normally accustomed to low light,
but a torch would be helpful for what I must do," he looked expectantly toward Holli.
"A torch would be of little use to us with so much rain. There is also a better solution
close at hand. I would ask that you become accustomed to another source first. Ryson?"
She looked to the delver as if it was truly his choice over what would be done next.
Ryson immediately understood her questioning glance. Her eyes remained upon his
face and not upon the sheathed weapon at his side, but he was well aware it was the
sword which she now wished to bring into use.
"Of course," he said simply as if the issue was not even in question.
His hand grasped the hilt of the sword and for a moment his head swam with
confusion. His head jerked of its own doing, ad he found himself staring upon the spirit
form of Shayed, except at that moment the ghostly image had no form. He saw a red
cloud. It swirled about, a crimson storm surge, and finally it began to take shape.
A hand on his shoulder shook him. The swirling red cloud disappeared and the form
of Shayed again stood before him. It was Holli's hand upon his shoulder.
"Are you alright?" the elder elf asked.
Ryson was about to proclaim what he had seen but fog swept into his mind. He was no
longer sure of what he had witnessed or even who he was looking at. He blinked his eyes
fiercely and finally even the fog cleared, but he had no recollection of what had
happened.
"Yes, I'm fine," he stated simply. "I'm not against letting Jon use the sword at all."
With a quick pull, he fully unsheathed the blade. A blanket of soft white light covered the
entire mountain top. It was now as light as dawn, yet even the most sensitive eyes of the
dwarves could look directly into the blade without causing the slightest pain. It magnified
and intensified the barest light. Even with dark clouds overhead and the sun well past set,
there remained light enough in the sky for the blade to supply ample illumination. Ryson
carefully placed the sword upon a rock near Jon. "Move it as you need it."
"Would I have to move the sun at noon day?" the dwarf said with a tooth filled grin.
"It is fine where it is. The honor of holding such a blade should be yours and yours
alone."
With that said, the dwarf went quickly about his work. In the new light of the blade,
he quickly measured the level precipice they stood upon. He walked back and forth
mumbling to himself before honing upon one particular section of the summit. He kicked
at the loose debris and quickly came upon solid granite. He dropped to his knees and
glided his hands over the smooth surface. Occasionally, he knocked upon the rock. The
small thuds sounded much the same to those that watched, but they revealed much to the
dwarf prince. Still upon his knees, Jon fumbled through his own pack before pulling out a
metal rod no longer than the span of his hand. At the end, a blue and white gem sparkled
in the amplified light - a dwarf rock-cutter. He tested the gem with the tip of his
forefinger before applying it to the stone.
He jabbed and scratched deftly at the smooth rock in front of him. He held the rod at
slight angles as he pressed the gem downward. The gem would slide across a small
section before Jon would pull it away. The longest cut was no greater than the length of
Jon's pinky, and the dwarf appeared to leave long spaces of rock untouched before
moving on to the next area. Intermittently, he patted the surface with his palm.
After making several marks upon the granite with the stone cutter, he retrieved
another tool from his pack. It appeared as nothing more than a miniature version of the
mace he carried at his belt. A thick wooden handle, shorter than the metal bar of the stone
cutter, led to a compact round stone at the top. The stone appeared gritty and rough at the
surface. Its black exterior was covered with gray specks.
With the stone cutter in his right hand and the rounded hammer in his left, he began
working again. He pounded the mace-like tool upon the granite. Amazingly, with each
impact, a tiny crack appeared in the stone. It broke through the granite as if guided by a
straight edge. Jon worked with such precision, that he soon had two right angles of a
square formed in the solid rock. He extended the breaks with equal precision, and the full
outline of a square soon formed. Before long, the crack grew deep enough that a large
section began to shift.
Jon smiled with satisfaction as he placed the two tools within his pack only to retrieve
one last, a flat bar. It was longer than the other two, but it was not made of wood or
metal. It glistened with greater brilliance than the gem tip of the stone cutter, for the
entire bar was impossibly one long gem.
Stephen Clarin could not withhold his amazement or his curiosity at the sight of such a
jewel "How is that possible?" he blurted out.
Jon's smile grew bigger, his own teeth now flashing with almost as much brilliance as
the gem. He allowed a moment of pride as he held aloft his tool. "Large gems can be cut
into many useful devices. It takes careful cutting, but it can be done. The gem that
produced this bar was cut into four others, though this was the longest."
"It is the longest known," Tun added, allowing his brother to garner even greater awe.
"Given enough time, Jon could have broken through the base of this mountain."
Jon bowed thankfully to his brother's kind remarks, but he spoke humbly to those that
watched him. "I doubt I would live long enough for that, but it can lift rocks hundreds of
times its weight without breaking, and I have used it to chisel through diamond clustered
walls."
As if to display the power of his tool, he flashed the flattened edge down into the
crack he had made in the stone. It plunged into the rock as if the granite were nothing
more than warm butter.
"Normally, I would construct a pulley system to lift the rock, but since we have Dzeb
with us, I doubt that is necessary. Would you honor me, cliff behemoth, by jarring the
stone free?"
"The honor would be mine," Dzeb spoke freely as he moved toward the area upon
where Jon worked. His powerful fingers grabbed hold of the gem tool, and he steadily
pulled back. A thick square slab of rock crumbled free from the surrounding stone. Dzeb
took his other hand and placed it in the opening created by the action of the lever. Jon
also guided his hands under the free stone, seemingly unconcerned over crushing his own
fingers. With a surprising display of strength, the dwarf assisted Dzeb in pulling the stone
free. They placed it aside from the newly created opening, and Dzeb returned the crystal
bar.
Holli moved toward the opening first. "Ryson, bring your sword here."
The delver followed the request. When his hand touched the handle, he felt no such
reaction as previously encountered. He brought the shimmering blade to the square hole
which was large enough for even Dzeb to enter. The glowing light revealed a set of stone
steps that descended out of sight.
"Our entry is set," Holli stated firmly, punctuated with as much dread as
determination.
"Let me and my brother go first," Tun commanded in his royal voice. "The rest of you
should follow but do not step off the stone steps until I command. To do so will mean
your death. It is that simple."
Not a single member of the party said another word, though they all took in one last
great breath before stepping upon the stone staircase, as if it was their last gasp of fresh
air. Ryson kept the blade near the opening as the two dwarves descended through the
newly formed opening. He entered at the middle of the pack so as to keep the light
amongst them all.
As Lief was the last to enter and disappear from the mountain top, the true Shayed
watched in angry desperation. The red chains bound her tightly. She screamed in futility,
for both sound and light could not escape her prison, and neither could she. She could
only watch in horror as a devious smile curled upon her imposter's face.


Sanctum offered little to greet the apprehensive adventurers, mostly rock and
darkness, but at least the stone steps provided an easy descent. They were built by the
dwarves, part of the internal construction of the tiers in this once hollow edifice. Their
purpose had not been to bring invaders down to the core, but to allow a path of exit. Once
a particular race had completed setting its restrictions within its own tier, they would
need a means of leaving Sanctum. It would not be wise to bury and seal the designers of
the barriers with their inventions. The steps were nothing more than part of the
foundation to serve that end. It was hoped they would never be used again, though now
they functioned as a path of entry, a purpose beyond the aspirations of Sanctum's
creators.
The stone staircase cut through Sanctum Mountain at its very center. Four consecutive
sections of steps, ten steps to each, led downward and broke at opposing angles. The final
leg of the stairs ended directly underneath the opening which bore them entry. Thus,
those that descended the stone stairway would reach a point exactly where they began,
albeit forty steps lower.
Each step was carved from pure granite. Layers and layers of rock dust masked the
flat footfall portions of the stone. The vertical edges, however, escaped the brown and
gray powder and shined with ancient polish, a tribute to dwarf construction. Most steps
passed the test of the ages without crumbling or succumbing to fissure. Only a random
few suffered the scars of cracks, and these appeared recent, probably the result of the
blast which freed the magic from this monumental tomb.
The steps themselves were fashioned wide enough to hold two side by side. The
descending group used the great width to do just that, and they clumped together as close
as possible, finding security in moving together.
Only two stood alone. Dzeb's physical stature prevented him from moving with a
companion at his side. His great size filled the width of a single step and not even the
slender Holli would stand comfortably in the available room.
Ryson also stepped down alone. As the bearer of the only source of light, he
maintained his position at the center. Five moved behind him as four lurched on ahead.
Directly in front of Dzeb, Ryson held his sword high. It glistened through the gloom,
giving off the light of five or maybe ten torches combined.
Ryson, as much as others within the party, continued to marvel at the sword as it
continued to defy logic. It was now known to them all that the sword was not a creator of
light but an enhancer of existing light. In this place, however, illumination was meager
indeed. Darkness covered the sky outside the mountain, even the brightest stars were
blanketed from sight. Now, they walked within the walls of Sanctum. Only the opening
created by Jon kept them from being completely consumed within the rock. To be sure,
the light of the sword dimmed when Ryson passed through the opening, yet the
illumination burned strong enough to light a distance of near thirty paces.
The Sword of Decree's ability to magnify such illumination was only part of its
mystery. The light itself showed as an anomaly. It did not burn the eyes to look at, did not
leave spots if anyone stared too long at the blade. It barely cast shadows, and certainly
not sharp images. The light seemed to swerve around those objects in its path, thus even
those that stood behind the cliff behemoth did not stand in his dark shadow.
The sword's illumination also failed to affect Ryson's night vision. Normally, when a
delver stood within light, his sight could not penetrate darkness in the distance, but here,
this was not the case. Beyond the radiance cast by the sword, his eyes cut through the
darkness. The border between light and dark was near invisible to him. He could see the
final section of stairs which remained in darkness with the same sharpness as those steps
which basked in the light of his sword.
In that, he found another mystery yet to ponder. His sight ended at the tenth step of the
fourth section. It was not the diminishing limit of his vision, but a distinct border between
what he could see and what he could not. The last step was not a fading image. He saw it
clearly, but whatever waited beyond it might have as well been covered in black ink. He
could perceive nothing but a void, a void which remained even as they descended deeper,
even as the last visible step finally came into the light of his sword.
The delver's eyes narrowed. The void defied the light. It remained as dark as when
they began. It defied his night vision. There was not a single object which he could focus
upon, simply nothing; not another step, not a granite platform, not even a loose stone. To
his eyes, there was nothing there, nothing but empty space, nothing for the light to reflect
upon and nothing for his keen eyes to grasp.
He took his eyes from the emptiness to refocus them, to bring them back to a sense of
spatial reality. In his bewilderment, he noted another oddity. While the stone stair case
was as visible to him as the cliff behemoth, the space beyond echoed the void. To his left
and right, far ahead and far behind, the light of the sword drifted into blackness.
Such should not be. Sanctum, an extinct volcano, took the shape of an inverted cone.
Ryson could see its external shape in his mind. The hollowness of Sanctum's core could
not extend beyond the limits of its external crust, yet that is what he saw. Where he
calculated the sides to be, there existed only the void. Where he should have seen the
sloping edges of Sanctum's inner walls, he saw emptiness. Only the stairs and the rock
surrounding the opening above remained visible. Every other part of Sanctum's existence
was bathed in darkness.
The emptiness dizzied him, left him reaching for rail holds which did not exist. His
knees nearly buckled as his keen senses could not break the grip of the void. He was a
delver in a vacuum -a man of uncanny senses, but in a place where those senses were
now blocked.
He needed something to focus on, something to anchor his senses and avoid sudden
panic. He threw his sights to his feet. He stared at each step before him as if their
existence meant his life. His nostrils flared. He breathed deeply, inhaling the scent of
every one next to him. He smelled the dampness of their clothes and the mud upon their
feet. He caught the faint traces of the horses they rode upon still lingering with each rider.
He swallowed the air, tasted the bitter bile of his own spit. He listened to those around
him, heard at least one shiver; heard them all breathing ever so lightly, as if taking in too
much air would bring poison to their lungs. He turned an ear upward. He could hear the
rain drops growing louder. Water that dripped through the opening onto the stone steps
echoed throughout the cavern.
He took hold of the echo, and with it, he found comprehension. It was as a song to his
ears. It rang in his soul like a triumphant symphony. The echo! It provided the answer.
The void was immune to light, but not to sound. The simple notes of the rain pierced the
void, bounced about to return to his ears, a phenomenon which could not occur without
the walls of Sanctum. It proved the existence of the surrounding rock as truly as if he
could reach out and touch it.
Again, he sniffed the air with near savagery. He picked up the scent beyond the party.
He inhaled the stale air, and long captured dust. He could smell beyond the void, smell
the age of captured air.
The answer was clear. The emptiness, the void, it was an illusion. He laughed as he
exclaimed as much.
"It's a trick!" he said with glee.
Tun was in front, near the last visible step when he stopped. He twirled about abruptly
as if he realized the delver had just stolen something from him.
"What did you say?!" His tone was as accusing as it was astonished.
Ryson still rejoiced in his revelation and ignored the angry tone of the dwarf. "I said
it's a trick."
"What are you talking about?" Lief called from the rear.
"I'm talking about the darkness," the delver called out joyously. "Look at how the step
where Tun stands is visible, but the next is not. Look around you, look for the walls of
this mountain. You can't see them."
All those but Jon and Tun turned about to witness what had previously gone
unnoticed. They murmured with curiosity. They looked in awe at the space beyond the
very edges of each step. Everything beyond them was consumed in darkness. They could
not deny the void any more than they could deny the very stone steps they stood upon.
"There's something that swallows the light," Ryson called out to them. "The walls are
there, but we can't see them. That's the trick I'm talking about. It's an illusion."
Tun called out sternly. "Delver! How is it you speak of such things? What is it you
know of Sanctum that you have not revealed?" His tone continued to carry more than just
a hint of accusation. His hard dwarf eyes bore down upon the delver with demanding
expectation.
The question surprised Ryson, ripped him from the joy of his discovery. He answered
near defensively. "I'm not hiding anything. You know more than I do about what's in
here."
"Yet you speak of secrets which you should know nothing about," Tun pressed.
"What are you talking about?"
"I'm talking about the illusion of the void. How is it you know of the dwarf secret?"
The words were louder than the dwarf normally spoke. His anger brought a tone which
echoed off the walls.
The reverberation of Tun's voice was not lost upon Ryson. He used it to explain
himself, though he did not understand why such an explanation was necessary. He
pointed to the air as he replied. "Do you hear the echo? That's what gave it away."
"You speak in riddles," Tun defied the explanation. "How can sound explain that
which is hidden to your eyes?"
"Easy," Ryson responded confidently, finally shaking off the accusing stare of the
dwarf. "I can tell how far the walls are from us by the echo. We should all be able to see
them. The echo is the same sound just bouncing back to us. The interior of the
mountainside should stand in the light of the sword, but it doesn't. That means they have
to be hidden by an illusion."
"Is this true?" Stephen Clarin asked of the dwarves. "Is this what the dwarves used to
protect the first tier?"
"It is just part of the obstacle," Tun explained as if insulted. "But I do not like the
delver revealing things which he should not know."
"What would you have him do?" Lief near demanded. He peered downward from his
position further up the staircase. He had to arch his neck to get a clear view over Dzeb's
shoulder. He continued with an accusing tone of his own. "Would you have him ignore
what he senses? He is a delver. He has explained exactly how he came to his conclusion.
Why must you remain as obstinate as the rocks you live under?"
"And why do you think I have to answer to you?" Tun snarled. He glared at the elf as
the others stood uneasily between them.
"Hey, now hold on," Ryson called out to them both. "There's no need for this. Tun,
I've told you the truth. I didn't know anything about what was in here when we entered.
All I know is what I see, hear and smell right now. But that was enough to figure out the
trick of the darkness. I still don't know what's causing it. I just know not to believe it."
Silence gripped the dwarf. The light of the sword illuminated his doubtful expression.
In the quiet, in the hollow of Sanctum, the sound of the rain became more prevalent.
Even Tun could hear it now. The faint echoes of dripping water penetrated the musty
cavern air. He gritted his teeth as if to brace himself against the abrasive, repetitive
sound. He might have stood there for the entire passage of the night had Stephen not
spoke up.
"I want you all to listen to me." His voice was filled with passion as he was careful to
cast his plea over all of them and not focus solely upon Tun. He spoke with conviction,
with urgency. He spoke with a comprehension of the depth of where they were and what
they needed to do. And he spoke with the vibrancy of youth. "Someone should have said
this before we entered this place, that someone should have been me. I guess we wanted
to get this thing over with as soon as possible. But that's no excuse. We walked into
Sanctum as if we were walking into a market, as if we could put aside the past like it
never occurred. But it has occurred and it's time we deal with it. Before we take another
step, we must come to the true understanding of what we must do."
"We must destroy the sphere," Dzeb said softly. "It is Godson's will. We are here to
carry out that will." He spoke as if the answer was so simple, and indeed to him it was.
His eyes, however, betrayed the confusion he felt within him when he looked at the
others. They did not carry that simple but unyielding understanding. Even Stephen
Clarin, a man touched by the very powers of Godson, carried doubts and fears which
were plainly evident to the cliff behemoth.
"It is that simple to you my friend." A small lump in Stephen's throat forced a pause to
swallow. He continued with a glistening tear in his eye. "You possess an understanding
that humbles us all. The rest of us, unfortunately, aren't as strong. We carry with us the
scars of the past, the burden of mistrust. We tried to ignore it, hoped we could overlook
it, but we really can't. We have to deal with it here and now."
The interpreter turned his attention back to every other member of the party. The
sternness of his voice matched his expression. "When I was given the human's portion of
the secret, I was told never to reveal it until it became necessary for another to carry. I
was told not to trust elf, dwarf, algor, or even delver." He cast an apologizing glance at
Ryson, as if he did not deserve to hear such a thing. "I accept the fact that the rest of you
have been told the same, and told never to trust the humans.
"Tun's reaction is perfectly understandable. His is the first secret to reveal and he feels
the most vulnerable. Once we pass this tier, he will be at our mercy, as we our now at his.
Is it truly any wonder to any of you that he would become upset at Ryson's revelation?
"I understand it. I accept it. I do both because I realize we have not joined in a true
agreement. Yes, we all agree to destroy the sphere, but we have not agreed to end the
mistrust. We have agreed to assault this place as I have seen in my vision, but we have
not agreed to put faith in each other. We can not succeed until we do each. We must
pledge loyalty not only to our mission but to each other as well."
He spoke quicker now. The sense of urgency heightened in his voice. "I tell you all, I
tell you in the eyes of Godson, that I trust you. I know you shall all do your best to lead
me safely through this mountain, as I will do my best. As to the delver, as to all of you, I
invite, no I demand, that you remain alert and do all you can do to protect the safety of
this group. Remember, one tier remains a mystery to us and that is not the fault of anyone
here. We must combine our strengths, as well as use the knowledge that is ours. Most of
all, we must come together. How can we possibly hope to overcome this place if we
remain isolated and mistrustful of each other?"
The words rang with passion, with truth, a truth which cut quickly to the soul of the
elf. Lief immediately responded, replied with both regret and sincerity directed at the lead
dwarf. "I apologize Tun Folarok. The interpreter is correct. Since your arrival, I have
been more than willing to remain in conflict with you. I have taken every opportunity to
question your motives as well as decisions. The truth remains that I have not accepted
your willingness to cooperate. That will no longer be the case. I am an elf of quick
emotions. I offer that not as an excuse, but as an explanation. If I question you in the
future, it will be out of my own quick temper and not from any mistrust directed toward
you. As does the interpreter, I pledge my faith to you as well as every other member of
this group."
"As do we," the algors responded in unison. Their concurring voices punctuated their
willingness to cooperate. It brought a smile to Stephen.
"Is there any one here that remains doubtful to anyone's intentions?" he asked with the
smile still gracing his lips.
None responded, but the eyes of the party fell squarely upon Tun. Though the edges of
conflict diminished from his chiseled features, the spark of opposition remained in his
eyes as well as his voice. "As Lief is an elf of quick emotions, I am a dwarf with little
faith in things I can not understand. It may sadden you, but I will speak the truth. What I
know of the humans, I do not like. And I do not know the algors at all. I have had
dealings with elves, both good and bad. The delver put his sword in my hand and I saw
the need to destroy the sphere, but I saw no need to trust anyone but myself. If my words
ring cold to any of you, there is nothing I can do. I barely put faith in my own brother,
how can you expect me to put faith in strangers?"
Uneasiness filled the cavern. His glare made it clear that no words would cleanse him
of his mistrust. He would hold to it as he would hold to his axe in battle.
The one most struck by the rebuke was Jon. His eyes dropped in obvious sorrow as
grief painted his face. His beard seemed to grow grayer by the second. He did not turn his
back on his brother, but he would not face him either.
Tun found no sadness in the cold response of those around him. He would, however,
make one concession. He spoke it as if a peace offering to an ancient and bitter enemy. "I
will make one promise to you all. While I may remain doubtful to your intentions, I have
no misconceptions of what must be done with the sphere. It remains as clear to me as
when I held the sword. It must be destroyed and I pledge everything within me for that
cause."
Lief found the words to respond first. There was no conflict in his voice, no anger
towards Tun. He spoke as if his pledge of faith and loyalty sculpted his reply. "Then that
is all we will ask of you. It is the true basis of why we we’re here. And no one should
doubt the word of Prince Folarok."
Stephen's expression, however, remained colored with disappointment. He opened up
to the dwarf, revealed his own sadness over Tun's remarks. "I won't doubt your word,
Tun, but I would have hoped for more from you. If you wish to doubt the words of those
that even now put the faith of their very lives in your hands, so be it. I wish there was
something I could say or do to make you understand, but I see in your eyes there is
nothing that will change your mind."
Tun responded, not harshly, but firmly, brittle with his own stubbornness. "What you
see in my eyes is the doubt created by years of witnessing human arrogance and frailties.
Every season they astound me with their greed to steal more and more of the land, to take
far more gems from the earth than they need. And it does not end with the humans. I have
knowledge of the ancient times, when dwarves suffered at the whims of wizards and
sorcerers, elf and human alike. While I can no longer argue with the need to destroy the
sphere, you can not take from me the understanding of what will come. You have visions
blessed by Godson, but I have visions based on my perceptions of what the return of
magic will mean to the dwarves."
"As I said," Stephen concluded both apologetically and sadly, "I know you will hold
firm to your beliefs, but I see no reason why I should hide my feelings from you. You
don't have to make explanations to anyone here, it is not my position to judge you. But I
will not lie to you either. If you hold to your doubts, I'll hold to my disappointment."
Both Tun and Stephen had nothing further to say. They stood quiet. The rest of the
group seemed lost, standing about wondering what to say or do. The indecision mounted.
They stood more like ten statues, as if they were made of the same stone which
comprised the stairs that held them.
Holli found the condition intolerable. The inactivity, the indecision, and the clustered
way they stood in the open; all of this left them vulnerable. Her mind, her well trained
and honed instincts, screamed to her the reality of the situation. They were standing
within the walls of Sanctum, perhaps the most dangerous place in all of Uton, standing
there like sheep surrounded by ravenous wolves.
Each passing moment grated on her senses, forced her deeper into distress. Though
her eyes darted about the cavern, the darkness kept her from piercing the mysteries of the
first tier. The void forbade her from finding threats. She could not see beyond the stone
steps, could not assess the size of the expanse that was the dwarf section of Sanctum. The
surrounding void was as damaging to her nerves as it was to the delver's.
Though she did not wish to usurp control of the group's movements from the dwarves,
she could no longer hold her tongue. "Tun? Are we in danger by simply standing here?"
His eyes washed over her, just as slight satisfaction appeared on his face. If the
delver's revelation had shaken his confidence in the sanctity of his secret, the elf's
question restored it. "Standing still may be the only thing which is truly safe in this
place," he said almost smugly. "It is movement that is dangerous. I bid you all to
remember that." He let the warning sink in before continuing. "I suppose it is time for us
to pass this level, and pass it we will."
"One moment please." The uncertain voice of Lauren broke the attention upon the
dwarf. The sorceress spoke meekly, as timid as a mouse with eyes upon circling owls. "I
don't mean to interrupt, but I have to do something about the cold. My clothes are damp. I
can feel the cold air on our backs. I won't be able to concentrate on what we're doing if
I'm freezing to death."
"It is cold," Stephen stated as he also realized how damp his own clothes were. He
noted his frosty breath. Until this moment, the excitement of the quest kept their minds
from the cold wind of night shrilling in from the opening overhead. Without torches to
exude heat, most would soon become numb. "What is it you suggest we do?"
"I think ... I'm pretty sure I can dry our clothes for us."
"A spell has come to your mind?" Holli asked perceptively.
Lauren could only nod. She did not wish to speak of how or why the knowledge
became her own. She did not understand it herself. A moment before she only knew she
was cold, uncomfortable in the damp clothes she wore. As if fulfilling a wish, a means of
funneling the energy within in her burst into her mind. A moment of concentration and
they would be warmed.
Most called for an immediate casting, especially the algors who were perhaps the most
uncomfortable in the drafty dampness of the cavern. Lauren hesitated, torn by the desire
to be warmed and the fear of unleashing yet another power which she could not
comprehend. She began to shiver, the cold gnawed at her, and finally forced the fear from
her mind. She closed her eyes and seized a distant thought.
The air around the entire group shuddered and then became colored with a light purple
hue. The cold was ripped from about them as dry hot air engulfed them all. It swirled
about, ever so slightly, like a hot but gentle breeze from the desert. Their clothes dried
near instantaneously and soon became warm to the touch, a warmth which would stay
with them. The cold damp from above was blocked and most of the party hummed in
satisfaction. Even the great cliff behemoth basked in the comforting warmth.
Lauren opened her eyes, at first she was smiling. Her burden of cold released, no
longer shivering, she embraced herself. She draped her arms about her shoulders to drink
in the heat. Her delight was short lived. Her realization that she was the sole creation of
this phenomenon pulled any further pleasure from her. She dropped her arms in near
desperation.
Her plight, however, went unnoticed as Tun called for their attention. "With our
thanks to the sorceress, we can now begin." If he was truly thankful, his voice concealed
it. He continued as if wanting to move beyond the use of magic as soon as possible. "It is
time I reveal to you what waits for us beyond the darkness. The delver is correct, the
cover of dark is an illusion. It is the first veil to discourage unwanted visitors into
Sanctum. The dwarves were never able to use magic to create illusions, but we know how
to use what the land gives us. Gems and crystals can bend the light, reshape it, create
things which are not there and hide things which are. That is what awaits us.
"It took the preparation of hundreds of perfect gems to create the obstacles in this tier,
but such was the importance of guarding the sphere. Any light, even the light of the
delver's sword, will be twisted to create numerous illusions. You will see walls were no
walls exist, you will see clear paths that are nothing more than dead ends, and you will
see solid ground which is truly waiting doom.
"As well as creating images which do not exist, the gems also hide those things which
you might wish to find. The one clear path through the maze of this tier is as disguised as
the best thief in the land. As for the trap door which leads to the next level, if you look for
it, you will never see it. It is bathed in the same void which surrounds us now.
"But beware, this is not simply a tier full of tricks. There are things very deadly, even
to a cliff behemoth. Spiked pits, pools of acid, falling boulders, and traps of other
assortments wait for a single misstep. Sometimes you will see me step directly toward a
pit while safe ground appears to my side. You must remember it is the trick of the gems.
You must not trust what you see, for the pit will be safe and the solid ground will hold
your death.
"This entire tier was constructed so that one who walked about in the light would die
as foolish as the one that stumbled about in the dark. Even a delver moving inch by
painful inch with his eyes closed would never avoid every pitfall that waits. Unless you
enter knowing what is safe and what is not, you would not survive this tier.
"One other thing, once we pass into the void, the steps will disappear from our sight.
Just as the ground beyond this spot is invisible to us, that which can be seen here can not
be seen there. When I take my next step, I will disappear from your sight as you will
disappear from mine. It is a safeguard to prevent anyone from finding their way back to
the steps once they make the foolish attempt to truly enter Sanctum. Only those that know
the true path would be able to find the stairs again."
With the secret revealed, Tun gazed into the darkness that greeted them one and all.
He watched it with growing displeasure, as if it were now nothing more than a curtain to
be thrown aside. If it were vulnerable to the edge of his axe, he would have cut through it
in disgust.
He knew his help was still needed. Knowing what evil lurked beyond the darkness,
and knowing how to defeat it were certainly two separate entities, but the truth of what
his people placed in Sanctum was now exposed. In his own eyes, the barrier itself did not
live up to its long history.
The secret to Sanctum was his birthright as prince. It was something spoken of in
hushed tones, a great burden. Now that he acknowledged it openly, spoke of it not only
outside of royal blood but outside his race, it seemed almost feeble, almost laughable.
The dwarf barrier to the unholy sphere was nothing more than a trick of light.
He and his brother knew which steps to take to gain safe passage through the tier, but
the barrier did not seem as deadly now that it was truly revealed. He never felt as
humbled as he did at that very moment. He spoke of what must be done with growing
dissatisfaction.
"Once I pass beyond, I will ask that my brother remain here to guide you one by one
to me. When you pass through the darkness, you must, without argument, step exactly
where I tell you to. When we begin to cross the tier you must also do exactly as I say. No
matter what it looks like I am doing, do not stray from the path I set. If you do so, you
will not only cause your death, but the rest of us will probably die as well."
Such a warning limped hollow and empty from the prince, but it needed to be said for
it was the truth. The path to be traveled was narrow, with no margin for error. He looked
to his brother before moving forward. "I expect you will be placing light gems as we go?"
"Yes," John replied still somewhat remorseful from his brother's previous remarks. "I
will place one here when everyone has past and another at the door to the next tier."
"What are light gems?" Ryson asked aloud.
Jon seemed grateful for the chance to remove his attention from his brother. "Light
gems reflect light from outside, like mirrors. It is what the dwarves use to bring light to
dark tunnels. I will place them at certain points of our travel to keep the light that is with
us now with us as we venture forward. With your sword to amplify that light, we will
never lose our current depth of illumination."
Ryson considered the explanation and held it in regard with the gems which waited
beyond the darkness, as well as the void itself. "Will you be able to penetrate the
darkness? And won't the gems beyond shift the light from where you direct it?"
"The gems that create this barrier of darkness do not stop light from entering," Jon
explained. "They only keep it from reflecting back to our eyes. As to the other gems, they
will play tricks with the light I direct, as they will with the light from your sword, but
they will not stop it from reaching its destination. Let me show you." He reached into the
pack which hung about his shoulder and pulled out a clear crystal gem. It appeared more
like an octagonal piece of glass than a multi-faceted diamond. He took one quick glimpse
of the opening above before placing it on the next-to-the-last step. Immediately, the light
within the cavern doubled.
"Right now, I am directing light from our entrance back towards Ryson. His sword is
now magnifying light from two different sources. Even without your sword, this reflected
light would allow dwarves to see for long distances in tunnels. Even though the gems
beyond this point will bend it, change it to create the illusions my brother spoke of, it will
reach the door to the next level. For now, I will hold it in the open so that even when
Ryson's sword passes through, those that remain on this side will still have light." He
took the gem back in his hand and waited for Tun to retake command.
The elder prince said nothing. He simply turned, faced the void, and stepped beyond
it. His body moved through the curtain of black much like breaking through the surface
of water, though there were no shifting waves of dispersal. It simply gave way to his
shape, and then returned to its original form. The veil remained intact, unfazed by the
crossing as the darkness swallowed Tun whole.
There was no visual trace of the dwarf, not an outline beyond the void, not a glimmer
of form within the darkness, yet he stood only a single pace beyond the last stone step
which remained visible to them all. It was only the sound of his voice which reassured
the rest that he was not removed to oblivion. "Send them one at a time, Jon."
The order rang loud and clear and revealed his close proximity. Holli and Ryson
stared with near disbelief at the spectacle. Her trained ears and his keen senses allowed
them both to calculate the dwarf's distance. They knew he stood no more than an arm's
reach from Jon, but neither could see even the faintest trace of the older prince. The light
from Ryson's sword continued to bathe the steps and should have shown upon Tun, but
the curtain of black consumed the glow and covered the prince as if he stood miles
beneath the surface in an airtight cave.
They were not given a chance to comment, for Jon quickly moved them forward. One
by one he guided them past the void. The experience was near mesmerizing. Each moved
up to face the darkness. It stood within a finger's length of their noses. Their eyes could
not penetrate it, not even Ryson with his ability to see in near total dark. It stood as a
wall, solid and thick. As they stepped into it, they cringed as if their minds told them the
wall would not give, but the veil did not hold the least resistance. It had no substance and
it gave way to their movements as free as the air about them.
The first step would take a foot and an ankle through the screen. They would
disappear just as Tun had vanished. Many wavered at that moment of crossing, looking
down at a leg which broke through the void and was no longer visible. Uncertainty
gripped them with unthinkable power as fear washed over their consciousness. Tun had
warned them a single misstep could mean their doom and here they were stepping into an
area they could not even see. The algors, Stephen, even Ryson were hesitant. As they
stepped into the void, they felt the ground ahead, carefully probing for solid footholds.
The ground was there and with the same rock solid sturdiness as any other platform.
Holli had the most difficulty with the crossing. How could she convince herself to step
blindly into the void while knowing the area was laden with traps and pitfalls? Even as
Jon waited patiently to guide her, she remained more than reluctant. Simply passing
through a barrier with such little knowledge of what waited beyond was an action of the
untrained, the foolish, or both. She tested the curtain with her hand first. The result was
no different. Her fingers vanished, then the rest of her hand. It dissolved before her eyes
just as everything else which passed through the void. She pulled it back rigorously and
inspected it, as if she expected missing digits. Nothing, however, had affected her hand.
She pressed it beyond the border of light and dark again. She let it linger there as she
inspected the border on her wrist that was the limit of her vision. The darkness encircled
her arm, just as something on the other side, out of her sight, took her by the hand.
She reacted near violently. She pulled, but whatever held her, gripped her tightly. Her
eyes narrowed without fear but with contempt. It became a tug of war with the veil of
darkness as the focal point. Instantly, she set her feet apart for greater balance and
leverage. She pulled her shoulders back, as far as her gripped arm would allow. She bent
at the waist and pulled rigorously and evenly against whatever held her.
With one violent tug from the opposing side, she was pulled from her feet. Against her
will, she flew through the void. The mere instant of passing was something she wished
never to go through again. For a split instant, during that miniscule moment that her wide
open eyes surged through the darkness, nothing existed. The light from behind her
disappeared, ravenously devoured by the void.
Thankfully, gracefully, life instantly appeared before her. Where there was once no
light, there was now an abundance. She saw the surprise in the faces of her comrades who
stood single file, though in a somewhat twisted line in front of her. Her hand materialized
before her. She saw the hand of Tun still grasping it firmly. With his help, she caught her
balance before she stepped wildly past the initial platform that waited beyond the stone
steps.
She appeared more than ready to scold the dwarf. Her eyes fixed upon him as he
released her. Her mouth trembled, ready to release a barrage of angry remarks, but she
clenched her jaw. She remained in control as she questioned the dwarf.
"Why did you do that?" Her voice was cool, but demanding.
"I know you are an elf guard," Tun replied stoically, as if he did nothing wrong. "Your
reluctance was not surprising. I understood your need for care, but you must understand
the need for haste. Though the safe path is set, the illusions are not fixed. They will
change as the light changes. If the night darkens, or if the clouds lift, what we see now
will not be what we see then. It is best to move quickly once we enter the heart of the
tier."
"Then you should have told us that before we started," Holli responded with great self
control. She spoke the words as advice and not as a reprimand. "As an elf guard, I react
differently than others. If you prepare me for such things, I will act less defensively."
Tun shrugged. The elf's reaction was not his problem. "Stand where you are and don't
move." He turned back and waited for the last few to cross.
Holli acknowledged the order. She took no steps, but she immediately scanned the
area which was now more or less visible to her. It was as the dwarf warned, the stairs
were gone, covered by the same void which previously hid the ground they now stood
upon.
Her darting eyes passed over the rough rock walls, and the level smooth floor. Total
darkness loomed overhead. A long corridor trailed off to her right while a wide open
expanse waited to her left. In the open space, she counted five spiked pits. She wondered
how many were real and how many were illusion. The corridor showed no sign of
danger, but the way was narrow and left no option for making any turn for as far as she
could see. In front of her, a path broke between two pits of still liquid. She smelled the
hint of sulfur in the air and guessed both were comprised of acid and not mountain water.
She could not see the conclusion of the path, for another veil of darkness blanketed it less
than four steps away.
Her surveillance was cut short by Tun's unbending orders. Jon had crossed through the
veil. The younger prince remained the last, waiting patiently behind Lief as Tun walked
carefully by the rest to retake the lead. At present, they stood snaked about in apparent
haphazard confusion. He addressed them showing little patience.
"Do not stray from this line. I have set you in this pattern because even now hazards
wait all about you. You must step exactly where the one in front of you steps, even if it
seems a waste of time. If I take twenty steps to circle around a single stone, the rest of
you must do the same. Ignore what you see other than what the person in front of you
does. Follow the path exactly."
He looked at Stephen who stood second in line. "Step as I step, move as I move. You
will mirror my actions as the sorceress will mirror yours, and so on through the line."
"I understand," the interpreter attempted to speak confidently, but his response was
hollow and filled with dread.
Perhaps Tun now felt the tier of the dwarves was lacking in true challenge, but others
did not. It unnerved the interpreter to be in a place where a single mistake, the merest
slip, would mean agonizing death. What would it be like to fall into a pool of acid? To
die slowly, painfully as his skin foamed away to nothing? How much better would it feel
to die by falling upon sharp, thick spikes? How many would pierce his body if he fell into
such a thing? The power of the darkness which previously blocked their sight of this
place added to his growing anxiety. If gems could bend the light to their will in such a
way, they could hide anything. His life was now solely dependent upon following Tun, as
were the lives of the others dependant upon him. If he erred, chances were those behind
him would only follow his mistake. The charge weighed upon him like a cloak of lead.
As Tun made his first step, Stephen wished anyone else would have been second in that
march.
Tun chose the long corridor. He started without further word, and he moved far too
quickly for the interpreter's liking. He marched as if moving through his own home in the
tunnels of Dunop. He gave not the slightest indication of watching what was behind him.
He had given his order and he expected all to follow. He would not stand over them and
guide them like children through the night.
From the rear, Jon was more observant of the movements of the others. He made sure
no one swayed from the original twisting path set by his brother, and he made sure they
mirrored Tun's current movements as well.
Tun took five steps down the corridor before turning to his left. It appeared he faced a
solid stone wall, but the illusion was revealed as he stepped through it. One by one, the
others followed the apparently impossible maneuver of walking through stone, and one
by one, they disappeared from the corridor.
Upon clearing the illusion of the wall, the party broke through to a clearing, an area
which looked much like the expanse which appeared previously. In fact, to Holli it
appeared as the same space. She noted the five spiked pits which appeared in the exact
positions as the first she surveyed. She swerved her head about to gain a better
perspective of where they had moved.
The wall of the corridor was not directly behind them. Instead, the corridor itself
reappeared, just as the path between the two acid pools. They had made no progress.
They were back at the starting point, though now facing the open expanse.
"Please watch yourself, Holli," Jon called out politely from behind.
She was about to reveal what had happened when a stern rebuke came from the head
of the line.
"Ignore what you think you see," Tun commanded with a tone which revealed he did
not like to repeat himself.
Exasperated, Holli turned her attention back to the algor that walked before her. Of all
that marched, she would have the most difficulty in fending off the illusions. She
shuddered each time it appeared as if they were stepping into pits of acid, lava, or spikes.
It was difficult for her to believe the feel of her own feet even as they landed upon solid
ground and she could only look down to see waiting death.
With all her might, she concentrated upon the steps of the algor, but she could not
refrain from scanning the area for threats. Each time she surveyed the surroundings, her
tension grew with leaps and bounds. They walked directly over the most blatant dangers,
even as safe ground waited within a single step's distance. She wished to cry out at the
idiocy of such movements, yet these same movements defied the very dangers that made
themselves so evident.
While not with the same degree of suffering, Ryson also found the march disquieting.
Though it was not his training to uncover threats before they manifested themselves, he
was a delver. He relied on all his senses to explore a variety of places and things. He had
traveled in caves previously, crawled through tunnels which threatened collapse or leapt
over gorges with no visible bottom. In these times of exploration, all of his senses guided
him away from danger. It now was his task to ignore his own honed sense of vision, or at
the very least, to change his perception of what he saw.
A desire filled him to uncover the secrets behind the illusions. He began to focus upon
guessing what was real and what was deception before they moved upon it. With his keen
eyesight, he sought the gems which created the magic of these mirages. He struggled to
perceive that which might reveal the presence of illusion by seeing beyond the actual
mirage and sensing the unnatural bend of light. At times, he was actually successful. He
attuned his sight to the slightest wavering of an apparent solid structure, or the blur of
distortion in visible open space. Several times he would predict correctly when Tun
would move away from apparent safety, walk through a solid wall, or step toward an
illusion of waiting catastrophe.
These desires, however, split his concentration. He was torn between watching the
steps of Lauren and searching for hidden answers to the illusions. He knew such
distractions were dangerous, but as Holli scanned for threats which were invisible to her,
his instincts kept him searching for answers.
The march proceeded through many corridors, past two curtains of darkness, over and
around hundreds of pitfalls, all without a single incident. Tun managed each turn with
unfailing memory. Countless times, they walked uncomfortably close to waiting death,
but death was always avoided. The cliff behemoth's size brought him within a cat's
whisker of destruction on many occasion, but he walked as calmly and as confidently as
Tun, as if he knew Godson was guiding his every step.
After throngs of twists and turns, after a period of travel where time now had little
meaning to any of them, they reached the center of yet another long corridor. Tun
stopped, as if to step through yet another wall. He did not, however, move beyond his
present position. Instead, he turned to face those that had unfailingly followed his every
move.
"We have successfully crossed the first tier," he stated without emotion. No hint of
sadness, relief or joy existed in his expression or voice. He looked over them all with a
stone cold glance. He saw the confusion in their faces which merely served to irritate
him. "I told you you would not be able to see it. The door to the next level is here." He
pointed to ordinary looking ground. There was nothing which indicated a door of any
kind. Shaking his head and muttering, he bent down as if to prove its existence by
opening the invisible passage.
As he reached, Stephen realized what he was about to do and bid him to wait.


Stephen's words did not form that of a command, the interpreter would never even
consider giving orders to the heir to the throne of Dunop, but they were brisk and direct.
More of a grave warning shaded his request, a sense of imminent disaster animated his
features.
"Please do not open that!" Stephen bent over to be seen by Tun, whose hand remained
poised to open a door which was still not visible.
Tun stopped. He pulled his hand back as if it neared acid. He took no offense at the
abrupt appeal, for he understood its true intention. He had led them though a sea of
hidden traps, death shrouded by the illusions of the gems. He had bluntly ordered all that
followed to heed his every move. He had done so because he knew that failure waited in
the form of an agonizing end, but now the journey through his maze was complete. The
tier of the humans waited beyond the invisible door, and it held secrets of which he did
not know.
He could not find fault with Stephen Clarin, and would not cast an angry stare in his
direction. Tun bore only limited knowledge of what waited beyond this door. While the
dwarves constructed the tiers, laid the foundation for Sanctum, he had no idea of what
waited within them. He knew there would be a second stone staircase, for the dwarves
had built such steps for all the tiers, but he could not know what horror waited within the
tier to create the human obstacle to the sphere.
With this realization, came another. It was time for him to relinquish command. The
moment of his authority over them had slipped away, and all too short for his liking. A
passive role awaited him now. The secret of the dwarves, his secret, had been revealed.
Nothing remained of the dwarves' obstacle, nothing which he might assist in overcoming.
The knowledge of the remaining barriers was within the minds of others. It was now their
lead which he must follow.
This understanding left him bitter, humiliated. Once this door was open, he would sink
to the back of the pack and be led about like an orphan. He and his brother, princes in
Dunop, dwarves of unlimited stature, would be relegated to the roles of peasants that
followed mindlessly.
His pride called for him to leave Sanctum entirely; better for him to walk away as if
the rest were not of his concern. He was too important to tag about like some duckling.
Let the others proceed without him. An heir to the throne never need follow. The urge
was strong, but two considerations kept him in place.
First, he needed to see the end of the sphere. The gift of knowledge that the Sword of
Decree placed in his mind remained as crisp as if he still held its handle. The destruction
of the sphere meant life to the dwarves. His acknowledgment of this need would see him
through this, even if it meant crawling at the rear.
Second, there was the opportunity to learn of what the other races placed in Sanctum.
He found pleasure in this. Soon, he would not be alone in revealing that which protected
the most infamous talisman of all. The humans, the algors, and especially the elves; they
would all have to face the sacrilege of professing their most guarded of secrets. He would
not miss this. Again, he would follow as long as it meant the others would be forced into
the same indignity of conceding that precious knowledge. It was now time for the
humans to reveal their portion of the mystery behind Sanctum, and he waited eagerly.
Stephen began. He spoke of the human secret as openly as he might speak of the
passing weather. If any emotion painted his words, it was detachment, as if he wished to
distance himself from what he was about to reveal. He always failed to comprehend the
underlying justification for the waiting atrocities whenever he pondered the secret.
Unlike Tun, there was never any pride for him in this secret. He held it with respect,
recognized the responsibility of being its bearer, but for him, the secret itself created only
apprehension over the human ability to create such horrible devices.
"The tier that waits beyond this door holds death as subtle as the traps which surround
us now, but without the innovation of illusions. The barrier is as cold and as stark as the
knowledge that created it. Mostly it is in the form of poison, poison which in its basic
composition would not deteriorate with age no matter how long it was trapped within this
rock. Poison vapors, tainted gases, invisible toxins, and dreadful contaminates; all things
that could withstand time and remain deadly were placed within the human tier."
Stephen noted the curious expressions mixed with the distasteful. The mere mention
of the poison struck a disquieting chord with the elves that even now were battling
against the taint of the free-flowing magic. The others appeared more burdened with the
extent and the number of toxins which waited within the tier. Their faces expressed
reservation, and Stephen felt compelled to define the secret in greater detail, to reveal it
as it was explained to him.
"More than any other race, humans have always been most concerned with science."
He spoke dryly, keeping his distaste for the subject under wraps. "That is why most have
chosen to ignore the legends, even ignore Godson. Humans look for definitive principles
to explain mysteries. Even during the time before the sphere, we as a race surged forward
in the study of natural laws such as physics, chemistry, and biology. Being so far
advanced in these studies, it is no wonder they placed in Sanctum what they did. With a
knowledge of poison gases and liquids, the humans used a mix of elements which would
snuff out our lives even before we were aware of their existence.
"You see, the humans at that time were not quite sure which poisons would be the
most effective, so they placed several within their tier. They knew that different gases
would have different attributes. Apparently, they wished to contaminate the area with
poisons which guaranteed the death of any intruder, no matter what race or what
immunity. The tier was divided very modestly by brick walls. The walls do not present a
true obstacle, they do not even stretch from side to side of the mountain. They merely
create chambers, pockets to hold and separate the different gases.
"The chambers also hold pools of synthetic liquids which would not evaporate, but
would constantly react to create more and more poisonous gas. Thus, as time wore on, the
concentration of poison would increase, making it more deadly now than it has ever been.
Some gases were designed to be heavier than the air and sink to the ground. The poison
waits for an intruder to walk by, to stir it up, and to finally inhale. Others mix with the
air, wait like a death cloud."
He stopped, gritted his teeth, and only continued after his sorrow became quite
apparent.
"The designers of the barrier weren't satisfied with just the poison gases. They
apparently wanted something with a greater dramatic effect as well, so they put in
another trap to stop entry. It's set to go off when we break the seal of this door. It was
made airtight before the humans handed over the last tier to the dwarves. Within are
compounds which consumed and removed the trapped air with slow precision. As the
chemicals aged, they also altered into a substance which would now ignite at any new
inflow of fresh air. So if you opened that door now, we would all be incinerated.
"Unfortunately, it doesn't even end there. Another diabolical obstacle is present.
Glowing stones wait within the far corners. They give off no traceable gas, but they will
kill more terribly. Without protection we would become sick almost instantly, fall to our
knees as our very skin would peel from our bodies. Our sight would grow pale. Even if
we could escape before total immobility consumed us, we would not escape the slow
death. It has been told to me that once contact is made with these glowing rocks, death is
irreversible."
The magnitude of his last statement was punctuated by its echo through Sanctum's
uppermost cavern. The telling of mysterious rocks with such power chased away any
warmth that drained from their magically heated clothes.
"If such is the case," Holli questioned with a cold calculating tone, "how is it you
intend for us to enter? I would expect only Dzeb is resistant to flame and these glowing
rocks carry a burden which sounds heavy to face." She waited patiently for a response,
but she listened with intensity, as if attending her training sessions all over again.
Stephen gestured with an open hand toward Lauren who stood behind him. A sense of
pride flushed away his remorse. He spoke near exaltedly that a blessing of power
bestowed upon one human might counteract the misdeeds of others. "She has the power
to protect us. That is why she is needed. She has the knowledge and ability to cast a field
of protection around us all. Just as such a field will protect us from the flames and the
stones; it will hold within it the untainted air which surrounds us now. We will be able to
breathe without facing the gas, just as we are protected from the death of the glowing
rocks."
The statement bristled in Lauren's ears. The pressure became insurmountable. She
burst into tears, wringing her hands at her chest. "You ask too much. I can't do it."
The outburst caught Stephen off guard. He stood stupefied as Lauren stood nearly
doubled over, wailing with frustration and fear.
"I can't control it! I don't want to be here. None of this is my fault!" Her outburst grew
and soon she could not mouth the thoughts which weighed upon her. She closed her eyes
as tightly as possible. Her skin wrinkled above her cheeks and at the corners of her eyes.
Uncontrollable moans echoed through the cavern just as her tears began falling to the
ground.
They stood about her, confused and tense. They looked about at each other, not
wanting to stare at the grief stricken girl, and not knowing what to say to relieve her
strain.
Finally, Stephen brought his own surprise under control, but he could not hide his
confusion. "Lauren, we talked about this before, talked about it before I brought you to
the church. You believed you could do it."
"I was wrong." It was all she could do to blurt out those three words.
Stephen patted her on the back lightly as she coughed out more tears. "Just calm
down. Take a moment to breathe. We're not going to go forward without you, so you
have all the time you need."
Lauren pulled her hands apart and clenched them into fists. She held them so tightly
that her nails made indentations in the flesh of her palms. The pain in her hands allowed
her to concentrate upon something other than the stone walls that surrounded them.
Slowly, she brought her moans to a near stop. The corners of her eyes remained wet with
tears, but they no longer streamed down her cheeks. With a few deep breaths, she opened
her eyes.
"I can't protect so many," she spoke in a shakily controlled voice. It remained raspy
even as she swallowed hard. "Look at how large the cliff behemoth is. How can I cast
something so big to protect us all?" Her eyes beseeched all of them to understand, to
realize what was being asked of her. She did not want these powers which now took hold
of her. She did not want to be held responsible for protecting them all. Her head swerved
about, taking in their confused expressions. She looked for compassionate understanding,
but found bewilderment instead. Her head dropped and her eyes sank to the ground in
depression.
Holli considered the matter with the logic of a guard. She weighed Lauren's concern
and offered the first solution to the problem. "We can reduce our numbers, if that is the
only way to pass. Both Lief and I know what waits in the tier of the elves. It is not
necessary for us both to go. One can remain behind, with both Jon and Tun. The dwarf
tier is passed, and there is no need for them to continue forward. We can wait here for
your return once you obtain the sphere. Perhaps, it is also possible for one of the algors to
remain behind, and even Stephen. If it is the power of the sorceress which will lead you
through, he can give instructions before you enter. If this can be done, we can cut the size
of the party in half. Will this help you, sorceress?"
She barely lifted her head. Her response was inaudible.
Tun's, however, was not. "I will not remain behind!" he commanded with his usual
authority. "As you have seen the revelation of the dwarf secret, I will see to yours. I will
also see the destruction of the sphere to the end. I will not remain behind."
The algors spoke together and spoke as if they did not hear Tun's outburst. "Only one
algor is necessary. It was your decision to send two. But another must decide who stays
and who continues."
Even the mere thought of making yet another division of the algors agonized the
delver. His objection, however, was covered by the protests of another.
"A separation is not necessary," Stephen stated loudly but calmly. "Lauren has the
power to protect us all. I know it and she knows it."
A light sob came from the sorceress who still stood with her head bowed and her face
concealed.
Stephen continued with a mix of compassion and resolve filling his speech. "I realize
you are not a follower of Godson, Lauren. You don't understand the power that guided
me to you. If you did, you'd lose your fears. But while you don't understand my faith, I
know you understand the power within you, a power which you can control. The barrier
you must create will be large, I realize that, but you can do this."
Her head jolted up. Her eyes and nose were red, her face blotched with the strain of
emotion. "I don't want to do it!" she nearly screamed.
"Bah!" Tun released.
"Alright, that's enough." Ryson turned aside the cold stare from the dwarf and placed
his attention upon the sorceress. He sheathed his sword so the brilliant radiance would
not be centered upon her. The level of light dropped significantly as only the strategically
placed light gems offered any illumination. Many of the walls which surrounded them
appeared to shift in size and shape. New paths emerged. Different traps became revealed,
some real, some illusion; the change all due to the shift in light.
Ryson ignored the alterations. He spoke softly to Lauren, in words that revealed his
understanding. "Ignore him, and for a moment, ignore everything else. Stop worrying
about what's happening to you. It's not helping you. You can wish with all your might
that it would stop, but I don't think it's going to help. You're probably telling yourself
over and over again that you didn't ask for this, didn't want it. All you want is to go back
to the way things were, when you were no different than everybody else you knew."
A gleam of hope rose in Lauren's eyes. "You know what I'm trying to say. You see
what I'm going through."
"Not completely," Ryson responded truthfully. "But I know the look you've had since
I met you. Most delvers share that look. When we learn of our abilities, it fills us with as
much fear as it does excitement. It is not a pleasant thought to be so different from those
around you. Some try to hide their abilities, even forget them. For them, it's a better
alternative than feeling isolated and alone. But that's their choice. Being a delver gives
me some understanding, but it doesn't give me all the answers to your problem. I know
very little about this magic, but I think I see in you the same confusion I once saw in
myself."
Lauren waited impatiently for him to reveal the secret of dealing with this dilemma.
She wanted to hear the words that would lessen the tension in her stomach and remove
the doubts and fears from her mind.
Ryson could only offer words which bluntly explained the truth.
"You may not want to hear this, but I'm going to tell you what I think you should do. I
think you should help us proceed. Basically, it's because your problem won't matter to
anyone, not even you, if we let the sphere kill us all."
He bent his head slightly to get a clear view of her face. "You're going to decide in the
end whether you want to use these powers or not. You're going to decide now, and you're
going to have to decide again after this is all over. You may want to return to life the way
it was for you and never cast a spell again. But you know what; you can only do that if
you help us now. The sphere's going to kill us, kill us all. It's going to kill everyone in
Connel. There'll be no normal life for you to return to. That's why I'm telling you what I
think you should do. It'll always be your choice, though, no matter what you do now. If in
the future you wish to hide your power, a decision to help here won't change that. Those
that are here aren't going to be revealing your secret to anyone. But a decision not to help,
well, that'll make your problem meaningless because we'll all be dead, including you."
He straightened up, pulled his sword again from its sheath. The light returned to its
previous state, as did the walls surrounding them. "If you want to place the responsibility
of your choice upon me, go right ahead. But I don't believe any of us have a choice any
longer."
Lauren stiffened at these last words. She wiped the remaining tears from her eyes as if
their presence insulted her. She threw her hands down to her sides, and again, they
formed tight fists. She glowered at the darkness in the distance as she swallowed the last
hint of her despair.
"Fine," she remarked simply but coldly, a single word which signaled a
transformation. While not taking a step, she leaned away from them all. Flinging her
hands open, as if releasing the fears which previously bound her, she swept loose hairs
from her face. She would not look at the delver, she turned to Stephen instead. "We can
all go. Tell me when you want me to cast the damn spell."
"Ummh," he stammered at first. He looked about as everyone now watched him. "I
guess we should go now."
"Very well." Her reply was just as cold, but slightly more biting. The blotches on her
face were quickly disappearing, her pallor returned quickly to a healthy pink. She closed
her eyes for but an instant. When they reopened, they burned with dark purple flames.
She said nothing.
She focused first on the floor at her feet. Her eyes bulged ever so slightly, and the
violet shadows of her pupils grew and threatened to reach out with unbounded fury. She
turned and arched her neck, slowly but surely scanning the entire floor under each
member. She then passed her view beyond the edges of where they stood. The air
hardened with each passing glance. The shell of the barrier became visible. It was
transparent, like a growing shield of glass. She turned about and the path of her sight
encircled them. The shell grew with each wave of her focus and soon it surrounded them.
Finally, she pressed her vision upon the area over their heads. She scanned the black open
space from side to side and front to back. With these last glances the barrier was
complete.
With a final pass, her eyes returned to normal and she set them back upon the
interpreter. "The field is set. We are completely surrounded and shall not be harmed by
any of the dangers you mentioned."
Stephen rubbed his hands together nervously. With nothing to say to Lauren, and
uncomfortable with her gaze, he turned instead to Tun. "If you would, you may open the
door now."
From near the back, Holli called out one last warning. "Won't his arm be singed if he
passes it through the barrier?"
"The barrier will move with him as it will move with us all," Lauren stated with
calculated confidence. "Any flame will no more hurt the dwarf than it would the cliff
behemoth behind me."
Tun did not wait for further explanation. His hand speared downward to the ground,
and indeed, the violet hardened shell stretched with his movements, revealing its own
flexibility. His fingers disappeared to those that watched as he groped for the handle
which remained hidden by the illusion of a gem. As he probed, the barrier expanded to
encase areas where his fingers pressed upon. A grunt of satisfaction revealed he found
that for which he searched. With a savage pull upon an iron ring, he hoisted a stone cover
on its hinge and opened wide the passage to the next level.
Instinctively, he had shielded his eyes from the bright flare which he expected, but no
such flame appeared. The opening was as quiet as church rafters. There was no ignition
of the air which even now flowed freely into the next level, no sign of explosion or even
the smallest spark appeared. The first barrier as explained by the interpreter had failed.
Stephen looked into the newly created hole with befuddlement. "I don't understand."
Tun returned the statement with a doubting, accusing stare, but said nothing.
Stephen felt the need to explain. "I assure you, the opening of this hole should have
released a wave of flame."
"It did not," Tun stated the obvious.
"Has the passage been opened before?" Holli asked.
Tun took but a moment to inspect the rock cover which was in his hand. "No. The
break in the seal is fresh. This stone has not been moved in ages."
"I don't understand." Stephen agonized over the mystery. The culmination of events
was quickly taking their toll on his youthful enthusiasm. Being inside Sanctum, following
Tun through the first maze, dealing with Lauren, and now the deficiency in his own
explanations; all of this drained from him his normal exuberance. He was growing tired.
It was late and he had not slept. The pain of riding horseback all day now sunk in his
legs. He heaved a heavy breath in exhaustion. He could not decide what to do next, and
the decision to move onward had to be made for him.
"Let us not question it further," Lief advised. "If the seal has not been previously
broken, there is no true danger to us. It may simply be that over time, the substances
placed in this tier offset each other. Let us just be thankful and move on."
"I think that's wise," Ryson echoed the sentiment.
Stephen shrugged, but accepted the directive.
Without any dissent, the group moved down a second set of steps. The protective
shield moved with them just as the light filled their path. Jon set another light gem at the
opening and Ryson's sword doubled and redoubled its radiance. Again, there were four
segments to the stairway, each comprised of ten steps, and square platforms of heavy
granite bricks divided the sections.
Stephen took the lead, but Tun decided to stay near the front rather than drop back
with his brother. The lack of fire had him questioning the words of the interpreter. It
fueled his misgivings, justified his doubts, and the dwarf prince wondered what else
might contradict Stephen's revelation of the human secret. He moved behind the
interpreter, filled with suspicion and eager to challenge any further discrepancies.
Stephen, himself, descended with curious eyes, grasping for an explanation to the lack
of flame which should have greeted them. He peered into the tier with every opportunity,
affording more attention to the surrounding area than the steps which bore him. There
was no void to block his vision. The open space of the tier bathed in the light from Jon's
gem and Ryson's sword and it held another alteration from Stephen's description.
There was at first glance, that which was expected. The ceiling overhead remained
safe and solid. It was well supported by the very walls of the mountain as well as by thick
stone columns. The pillars were wider than the cliff behemoth and stood the test of time
far better than the brick walls constructed by the humans.
Here waited more of the unexpected for the interpreter. There were no sections in this
room, no division of space. Most of the walls which divided the room into chambers were
reduced to rubble, or even clay dust. Only two or three remained partially standing, and
they were crumbling and unsteady. With the decay of the brick, the tier now took on the
shape of a wide open expanse rather than a space divided by separate chambers.
There could, however, be no denying the previous existence of the brick walls. If not,
Tun would have been more than willing to challenge the interpreter's truthfulness, but
even the stubborn dwarf could not ignore the crumbled remains. Their remnants verified
the existence of chambers in an earlier time and served to confirm Stephen's knowledge
of the waiting obstacle.
Other evidence existed as well. Vapors rose unsteadily from puddles of dark liquid.
The air shimmered in several places with hazy clouds. The floor was hidden, encrusted
with a thick fog which crystallized in many areas. And to everyone's dread, each corner
radiated a light from its own source. Collections of small pebbles, no larger than
fingernails, gleamed with a greenish orange glow. It reminded them all that the absence
of the flame did not constitute the end of all dangers. Most of what the interpreter warned
indeed waited within these walls, and it remained as deadly as he explained.
Still, the absence of the walls, the removal of the chambers, constituted a shift from
the original obstacle. Lief offered the change a possible explanation for the flames which
did not materialize.
"If the walls which separated the gasses collapsed, could this not have caused changes
which might explain the absence of the flames?"
"I guess it's possible," Stephen muttered. He had stopped at the bottom of the stair
case and surveyed the now open space from an even level. "I'm not a scientist. I'm not
sure what would happen if some of these gases mixed with each other."
The thought troubled the elf guard. "Does that mean you are not sure if we are safe
where we stand? Is it possible the barrier will not protect us?"
Stephen frowned, but shook his head. "No, I didn't mean that. I honestly believe we
are safe. As long as the barrier remains air tight, I can't believe anything will hurt us. It's
just that I wonder if any of the dangers exist anymore. The air may be as clean to breathe
as the air outside. All the different gases might have neutralized each other, just as it did
to the gas which was supposed to ignite on our entry."
Ryson looked nervously toward the glowing stones in the far corners of the tier. He
spoke with urgency. "It looks like there's at least one thing that's still dangerous here. The
rocks you spoke of still glow. So unless anyone really wants to poke their head out to see
if the air is free of poison, I suggest we keep moving."
"You're right," Stephen allowed as he shrugged yet again.
Before they started, Ryson questioned Lauren. "How are you holding up?"
"Do not fear the rocks, delver" the sorceress replied almost laughingly. While she did
not wish to respond to the delver, she found his apprehension somewhat fulfilling. "The
barrier will hold, and though I am tiring, I will last."
"Alright." He dismissed the strangeness of her reply as he urged the rest to move
without delay. "If she's getting tired, we should move as quickly as possible."
It was Holli who called out one last question. "Stephen, do you know of any traps
which we must avoid?"
"There was no need for traps," Stephen conceded. "The gas and the stones would be
enough to stop anyone."
Holli addressed the entire group with a stern warning. "Still, there are liquids which
might prove deadly if we touch them, and the brick walls that still stand remain in danger
of collapsing. I suggest you steer us clear of such obstacles. Do not become careless in
haste to reach the next level."
"Very well," he approved. "I'll take us down a center path. The door waits at the far
end, over there." He pointed off in front of him.
The faint outline of the door was visible at that point only to the delver and the elves.
Their keen eye sight allowed them to cover the great distance. While Lief and Holli could
make out only a meager trace of the stone door, Ryson obtained far greater detail, and
with it an answer.
"There's where your flame went," he announced suddenly.
Stephen, about to take weary steps forward, stopped himself as he shot a confused
look at the delver. Indeed, all eyes were now on Ryson, and all waited for an explanation.
He spoke without hesitation. "The door's damaged. It's shifted off its hinges and there
are scorch marks all around it."
"Has it been opened?" Holli questioned in a near demanding tone.
"I don't think so. It looks like something pounded upon it from the other side."
Holli looked toward Lief. "That is the delver tier."
Lief responded with equal grimness. "We still have no idea what waits for us there."
Again, Holli questioned the delver before they proceeded. "What do you think
happened, Ryson?"
"It's hard to say from here. Some kind of force hit the rock door, damaged it, and
shoved it from its original position. I guess when that happened, it broke the seal. The
flame we expected when we opened this door already occurred around that one. There's
scorch marks all around the cracks."
Tun became frustrated in listening to this babble and being unable to see that which
the delver described. "Let us move forward and we can all take a look," he demanded. "If
there is damage to the rock, it is fitting that my brother and I inspect it as well."
"That's a good idea," Ryson agreed. "I'd like to get a closer look myself."
They moved forward over the flat rock floor. Stephen led, but there was no true need
for his direction. A path through the center of the tier led directly to the door. It contained
no obstacles as the gas emitting liquids and the crumbling walls remained off to the sides.
They remained grouped together, but not out of fear of a misstep. They wished only to
refrain from stretching the limits of the shield that protected them from unseen hazards.
They formed more of a haphazard cluster within Lauren's magical field and abandoned
the long snaking line which brought them through the dwarf tier.
The broken stone door called to them as well, both as a mystery and a path of freedom
from the stones. As they passed pillar after pillar, and beyond several pools of foaming
liquids, it became visible to even the weakest eyed traveler among them. The scorch
marks were clearly present and the cracks near the hinges verified Ryson's earlier report.
The last few steps were taken in near trot as all wished to examine the door as well as put
this tier behind them.
Tun took an authoritative step forward to examine the damage in the rock. At his
grunting request, Jon joined him.
Jon took greater care in feeling the rock and examining the cracks, and he announced
his observations to them all. "The force which broke the stone came from the other side.
It did not press upon the door directly. It was also not a hammering effect. Whatever it
was, it came in the form of a steady stream of great power. The force broke the seal and
allowed air to rush through the cracks. Air continues to flow through even now."
"How long ago?" Holli requested with a calculating expression.
"Recently," Jon explained. "Within this season."
Holli nodded her head with approval. She swerved about on her heels assessing their
location within the tier. Her eyes cast first to the stone stairway across the rock floor and
finally upon the ceiling.
Lief noted her reaction. "You are aware of something?"
"I believe so," she said firmly, but remained unsatisfied with her visual inspections. "It
would be clearer if I knew which direction we faced."
"We face south," Jon replied quickly.
"Are you sure? How can you tell from within? With all the tricks played upon us in
the tier overhead, it was impossible for me to keep a lock on our direction."
"I know the path as well as my brother," Jon answered simply. "I always knew what
direction we were headed. I also know the general construction of Sanctum. Even though
this door was sealed by the humans, its foundation was built by the dwarves. Trust me,
we face south."
"Then I know the cause of the break in that door," Holli responded with hard edged
certainty. "It is the result of the tunnel which the sphere created to funnel the tainted
magic to the free air."
Ryson's eyes shot open wide with enlightenment. "She's right! The breach in
Sanctum's wall was on the southern slope. If the break in the wall went straight to the
core it would have to break through the tiers at some point. It must be right beyond this
door."
"That would coincide with my findings," Jon stated in agreement.
"There is only one way to be certain," Tun stated almost belligerently and with
definite impatience. "Let us open the door and see for ourselves."
"Wait! That might tell us what we need to know, but we don't know what else waits
for us beyond this door," Stephen reminded him.
Holli repeated the need for care over haste. "The interpreter is correct. The delver tier
awaits us now. We can not be certain of what dangers it holds."
"And we won't find out by standing here," Tun answered obstinately.
It was Ryson that ended the short debate, ended it as he realized the new danger they
faced. He took a deep breath, and held it. He waited, as if sampling the air in his lungs.
"We can't stand around here much longer no matter what," he said with a new sense of
urgency. "We're running out of air."
Focus came away from the broken door and upon the very air that surrounded them.
Many sniffed the air. They sensed nothing different, but they could not deny the logic of
the danger. The barrier was airtight. It surrounded them all, ten of them breathing the
same trapped air. It would certainly not last indefinitely.
The glow of rocks in a far corner called to them. What they faced became as clear as
the greenish orange glow. If they remained within the barrier too long, one by one they
would pass out. When the sorceress lost consciousness, the barrier would fade, leaving
them open to the dreadful death the rocks offered. If she dropped the barrier to refresh
their air, the possibility of poisonous gas overtaking them remained prevalent. And of
course, the deadly power of the rocks might wash over them in that single instant.
"We don't have much choice," Ryson admitted what they all now knew. "We can't just
stay here. And we can't take too much time waiting around to figure out what might be
waiting for us. We have to open this door and move on."
"But what if a trap waits just beyond this door?" Stephen offered the dreadful
possibility with reluctance, but it needed to be addressed. "Simply plunging forward may
be as deadly as waiting."
Holli took command with a cold, determined expression. "We have no choice. We
know death waits for us here, which means we can't stay. Turning back will not bring us
any closer to the sphere, so that is also not a choice. We must move ahead and that means
going through this door. We knew we'd have to face the delver tier eventually, and now
we must do so. But we will do so with the option that offers us the greatest chance of
succeeding. I doubt simply opening the door will cause us danger. It has already been
shifted by the passage of force and the seal has been broken. Tun, I want you to open the
door while I stand ready at the opening. The rest of you, I want you to move as far back
as the force field will permit."
Nearly everyone submitted, even Tun showed no reluctance at remaining in harm's
way. Ryson, however, protested.
"It shouldn't be you," he demanded of Holli. "You should go back with the others.
This is my responsibility."
"I will not argue with you on this, delver," she scolded him. "You are still needed. If
there is an unknown threat at this point. I am best suited to deal with it."
"That's not true."
Tun glared at Ryson. "This is no time for heroes, delver. Do as you're told."
With a cold stare of his own, Ryson was ready and willing to respond to the dwarf, but
another angry stare from Holli left him reeling with the realization he could not win. He
stepped back with disgust.
As Holli took the bow from her shoulder and loaded an arrow, Ryson took hold of the
sword's hilt with both hands. He steadied himself for the unknown, focused on what
might wait beyond. He could not see the tier below them, but a clear wind of
comprehension cleared the doubts and fears from his mind. In an instant, he understood
the Delver secret.
"There's no danger," he muttered nearly unintelligibly.
Holli swerved her head about to meet the delver's gaze with a demanding stare of her
own. "What?"
"There's no danger," he repeated.
Holli tried to reassess her position. She looked again at the stone door and then back to
Ryson. "We can open the door without danger to us?" She attempted to confirm.
"Yes," he nodded, but with no explanation as to how this knowledge came to him.
Holli's jaw tightened. She turned back to the door. Her eyes bore down upon it as she
called to Tun. "Open it."
With a sudden heave, the dwarf pulled upon the handle. The stone door broke free
from its hinges. It cracked under its own weight, and a large piece fell with a thud to the
ground.
With the door pulled away, Holli thrust her attention through the hole. She pulled back
on the bow string as her eyes darted over everything which was in the path of her vision.
The bow string remained in her grip, but the arrow would not fly. She stepped closer to
the opening, and again her darting eyes scanned that which waited. Slowly, carefully, she
released her tension on the bow string, returned the arrow to its quiver, and the bow to
her shoulder.
"You were right," she exclaimed to Ryson. "There is no visible danger, but there is an
obstacle. It is as I expected, the tunnel created by the sphere passes through the wall just
beyond the door. The energy which created the breach also destroyed the stairs to the
next tier."
Ryson's mind quickly calculated the situation. He stepped up to take a look for
himself. His sword brought a shower of light upon the rubble beneath the hole. There was
little of the stone steps remaining other than broken rocks. The distance to the floor was
great, but the comprehension that still no danger existed within this tier brought him vast
hope. He turned back to the others as he again sampled the air with a deep breath.
"We don't have much time, but I think we can make it. I have a short rope that will
help us down. I'll go first and help catch you for the last distance you have to jump. The
only one I'm worried about is Dzeb. My rope probably won't hold him and I know I can't
catch him."
The cliff behemoth strolled calmly to the opening. He glanced down to the next level.
The distance measured well over twice his own great height.
"I will jump," he stated as casually as if he were about to do nothing more than jump
over a blade of grass.
"You can make it without injury?" Ryson questioned.
"I will not be harmed," Dzeb countered.
Ryson accepted the option. He doubted the cliff behemoth could have lied if he
wanted to. "Then we'll have no problem at all. If you hold the rope, you can lower us
down and I can take it from there."
"It will be as you say," Dzeb agreed.
Ryson dug quickly into his pouch and pulled out a short rope. It would not cover the
full distance of the fall, but it would handle most of it. He gave one end to the cliff
behemoth and turned to face the opening. He made his descent with a flash of speed,
moving before Holli could issue another warning or perhaps request that she go first. He
shimmied down the rope in the blink of an eye. He did so with the sword still in one
hand. He jumped the last span, a distance which was nearly as long as he was tall. He
leapt with no fear of injury and no fear as to what might wait within this tier. As he hit
the ground, he remained certain that no danger would befall him.
He leaned the sword against a pile of rubble to free his two hands. The light increased
in this tier, a result of the breach. With the tunnel so near, the sword was now reflecting
more than just the light directed by Jon's gems.
The light sparkled off the hardened shell of Lauren's magically created shield. The
spell barrier moved with him, expanded to cover the distance, but it appeared to weaken
as it stretched. It remained enclosed as it extended up to the opening where Dzeb waited
with the other end of the rope. Worried that the spell might fade, he called up for them to
move quickly.
One by one they descended the rope. Ryson supported them the last small distance as
they jumped into his guiding arms. As Dzeb stood alone, he dropped the rope. The others
cleared aside as he prepared to jump. An awe-inspiring sight to be sure. The mammoth
being plunged through the air and landed with the force of a giant boulder. The ground
shook, but Dzeb kept his feet. He approached them as if nothing had happened.
With all again on one level, the force field constricted to cover a smaller area. The air,
however, was truly becoming thin, and they could now all recognize the threat of the
enclosed space.
Holli spoke quickly of their slim options. "We must be free of the barrier. Even now
our time is growing short."
Lief pointed to the hole above their heads. "What of the tier above us. It still holds gas
and the glowing rocks."
"The gas should remain within the tier," Stephen responded to the concern. "And the
danger of the rocks can not affect us here; it will not pass through the heavy stone that
surrounds us."
"But the passage remains open," Lief persisted.
"The rocks remain in the corners. As long as we do not walk in their direct path, we
will remain safe."
"The tunnel will also offer ventilation to disburse the gas," Holli offered. "We have
but one concern. We still do not know what waits on this tier, and we are running out of
air."
"I tell you, no danger exists," Ryson reaffirmed his earlier remark.
Holli was about to question him, but Lief called to their attention once more. "Look
there!" He pointed to a rock wall to his left. The word "Beware" was carved deep into the
stone. There was nothing else.
"Then what do you make of that?" Holli asked of Ryson.
"It's as much an illusion as the walls we walked through in the dwarf tier. There is no
danger here." Ryson replied with such certainty that the elf guard did not know how to
respond. The delver pointed his attention to Lauren. "You can drop the barrier now."
A wave of relief swept across her face. Maintaining the field constantly pulled upon
her. It felt almost as if her very life was draining from her. She turned her focus upon the
hardened shell of air with immediacy. The shadow of purple rose again in her eyes. As
her sight drifted over the very edges of the barrier, the field dissolved.
With the first break in the shell, the surrounding air burst in with a loud pop. A musty
breeze brushed against their waiting faces. Those that inhaled first did so almost
reluctantly, fearing a lingering cloud of poisonous vapor. Small guarded breaths brought
in the most meager mouthfuls. They stood silent, waiting, as if expecting one among
them to fall to the ground. And one did.
It was Lauren. She collapsed as the last fragment of the barrier disappeared, but it was
not poison which brought her downfall. The air held no toxin, only the faint mustiness of
time and even that was being cleansed by the recent opening in the side of the mountain.
Lauren fell unconscious out of fatigue.
Ryson caught her before she hit the ground. He pulled her to a far wall and leaned her
shoulders against it.
"What's happened to her?" Stephen called out as he rushed to her side.
"It is the use of magic," the two algors answered in unison.
"Such long powerful spells exhaust the soul," one continued solo.
"She will need rest," followed the second algor.
"We can revive her with our healing," they finished in chorus.
They moved to Lauren with steady assurance and motioned for Ryson and Stephen to
give them room. Each placed a hand on her shoulder and on her forehead. They were
careful not to scratch Lauren's skin with their long, sharp claws. A thick green membrane
slid over their bulging black eyes. They whispered something, again in unison, and
Lauren's eyes fluttered open.
"What happened?" she asked with a raspy voice and hollow breath. She rubbed her
eyes, trying to bring her vision back into focus. She barely recognized the fact that the
two algors were now at her side.
The algors stood and stepped away as if they did nothing special while Stephen
responded to the Rachael’s question.
"You fainted," he replied as he knelt back down next to her. "The algors revived you."
"You will need to rest for a while before you are ready to walk, but you will not need
sleep now," the algors stated together.
Lauren looked with confusion to Stephen. She ignored the delver who was also now
back by her side.
The interpreter did his best to clear the confused look from her face. "The algors
apparently have the power to revive as well as heal. They said using the magic exhausted
you."
Lauren turned her attention upon her own hands. She rubbed them together lightly in
front of her face. She felt the slight ache in her muscles, felt weariness in her back, but
another sensation was much more prevalent. She tried to speak, but a long yawn
interrupted her momentarily. After her lungs filled with the free air of the delver tier, she
spoke with a stronger voice.
"It's more than that," she described. "I feel empty inside. Not just weak, but like I've
lost something."
It was Lief who responded to this statement. "You've expended most of the magical
energies which your body has stored over these past few days. That is the absence which
you feel. Do not fear, though. Based on what I've seen, I would guess you will collect the
energy quickly. The emptiness you now notice will dissolve."
Lauren stared at the elf with a mixed set of emotions, not knowing quite how to
respond. Was it not so long ago that she would have given anything to be free of the
magic power that filled her? Was it so hard to remember the moments when she despised
her new found abilities? As for now, the reassurance that the power would return brought
her more comfort than misery. She broke her gaze from the elf to return her stare to her
hands. She mumbled something about needing to rest as she felt the energies pouring
back into the core of her being. This time, she indeed welcomed the magic.
"Ryson!" It was Holli who called. She stood tensely. Her eyes darted about the open
space they stood upon. She stood like a coil ready to spring. Her hand again held her bow
and again an arrow rested in the string. "Explain to me why we stand carelessly about
within Sanctum upon a tier we know nothing about. This is foolishness." Her words were
strong, but she would not fix a stare upon him. She continued to scan every direction,
waiting for a threat which she was sure would materialize in any moment.
"There is no threat here," Ryson responded as he reluctantly left Lauren's side. He
knew he was as much responsible for her exhaustion as anyone else. He recommended,
urged her, to help them forward. As well, he could not deny the animosity she now held
toward him. He would have liked to extinguish the aversion she cast upon him, but he
realized Lauren would not even acknowledge his presence. He sullenly approached Holli
as he made his explanation. "You can relax. The only thing that was placed in this tier
was that carving." He nodded to the warning which now stood upon the stone as more of
a puzzle than a threat.
"There is nothing here?" Tun questioned with anger as well as doubt. "No secret? How
can you expect us to believe that?"
"I didn't say there wasn't a secret," Ryson stated, flipping an annoyed response to the
hostile dwarf. "The secret is that the delvers saw no reason to put anything in Sanctum as
an obstacle." Ryson turned back to Holli as he continued his explanation. "I guess they
didn't see a point to it. I can only assume they figured that with two tiers above and two
tiers below this one, there was no need for another trap or a barrier. I guess they took the
time to carve out the warning just to make it seem like something was being placed
within, but there really isn't anything else here."
"How is it you know of this now?" Holli asked without accusation, but certainly with
curiosity, and perhaps even doubt.
"It was the sword again," Ryson admitted, feeling somewhat foolish talking about a
magic sword. "When you moved me back from the door, I concentrated on being
prepared for anything that might wait for us here. As I held the sword, it all suddenly
became clear to me. I just knew that this tier held no danger. In all honesty, I didn't know
about the carving until I saw it, but when I did, I understood that as well. 'Beware', it's
just a trick, a trick to make someone think that there's something more horrible in here
than nothing. It's like when I knew how to deal with the vampire, I just know."
"I see," Holli immediately stood down from her ready position. The bow went back
over her shoulder as she placed her focus on the surrounding rock.
The tier was only slightly larger than the one above. It contained the same stone
pillars, and the same rock floor. There were, thankfully, no glowing rocks and no pools of
liquid exuding poisonous vapors. The door to the next tier was located upon the floor
nearer to the center of the cavern. It was within sight of them all, and it was closed tight.
The only true spectacle was the breach which burst through the mountainside. It also
broke through the floor of this tier, creating another entry to the level below.
Holli stepped carefully up to the gaping hole. She tested the strength of the rock with a
probing foot before placing any true weight upon it. Satisfied it would hold her, she stood
at the very edge. The break in the floor was the same size as the tunnel which was carved
through the wall. Its circular border was at least as tall and as wide as Dzeb.
Ryson moved to her side and joined the inspection. His eyes followed the trail of the
newly formed tunnel which jutted upward at a steep angle. Its edges were much like those
he inspected at Sanctum's exterior, and just as he noted when standing at the tunnel's
conclusion, he saw the curve in the burrow. For some reason, the blast did not break an
arrow’s path through the rock wall. Instead, it bent enough so that there was no straight
visual path. He concluded that the curve was as much a defense mechanism as the
magical force field which sealed this tunnel.
His considerations and inspections were interrupted by the soft whisper from one
behind.
"I may be too quick to draw a conclusion from this, but I believe I might see an
advantage here for us to take hold." It was Lief who spoke quietly, guardedly, and only to
the elf and the delver. "This may offer us a great opportunity," he pressed a finger to his
chin as he considered his own proposal. "If the fissure in Sanctum creates a path directly
to the sphere, we will no longer have to move as dictated by the construction of the tiers."
Holli raised an eyebrow, pondering the proposal with interest. Lief, however, was not
able to continue unabated.
"What are you speaking of over there?" Tun fumed with rage over the attempt at a
private conference. "What is it you wish to exclude the rest of us from?"
Lief almost exploded with rage. He turned about with fiery purpose. His brow knitted
as his jaw tightened. The words of frustrated intolerance came to his tongue, but he bit
them back. He remembered his previous vow of trust before going off on a tirade of his
own. He took long moments to swallow his anger before finally responding. "My
apologies, Tun. I have struck on an idea which might assist us and I wished to discuss it
with my fellow elf."
"But the delver stands with you, too," Tun retorted. "The delver who even now states
that we should believe him about no danger existing within this tier."
"My thoughts did not address this tier," Lief admitted. "My idea involves the very
breach which the sphere uses to emit its energy to the land above. I wonder if we might
be able to use it as a shortcut to the sphere itself."
Silence greeted the elf's announcement. All eyes, save Lauren's, were upon him, and
they all waited for further clarification.
Lief continued his explanation to the group as a whole. "There are but two tiers left
which separate us from the sphere, the algors', and finally the elves'. Rather than stay
within the confines of the tiers, we can use the breach as a more direct path."
"Do you mean by that you would not reveal what the elves have hidden in Sanctum?"
Tun questioned severely.
"No. We will still have to deal with that obstacle, but not to the same degree. If we
stay to the stone steps and original doors, we will have to transverse the entire elf tier. If
we use the breach, we cut our time upon the tier and thus reduce our risk." He paused, but
could not refrain from casting the slightest rejoinder upon the dwarf prince. "I will still
have to reveal to you what the obstacle is. When I do, you will be happy to use any such
short cut."
Tun fumed, but it was Ryson who stated the first reluctance. "If we use the tunnel, that
will place you and Holli directly in the path of the magic. The last time that happened,
you didn't do so well. It still contains poison to the elves, remember?"
"You do not have to remind me of that," Lief acknowledged. "I am aware of the
danger, I can feel it even now, but I am also aware of the danger that waits below. Trust
me, I will be safer in direct contact with the magic."
"I don't know," Ryson said as he shook his head. "We were only in the tunnel for a
few moments and you had to find open air."
"That is because I was probing for the magic," Lief countered. "If you also remember,
at that same time I was still in search of answers. I did not know where the sphere was
and thus I opened myself to the energy. I will not do so again. I will admit that I can not
keep the taint of poison from me completely, but I can guard against it. It is our best
option."
"Well, what about the drop?" Ryson pointed to the hole in the floor. "We'll have to get
down the same as before, by climbing and jumping. Won't it be safer to use the stairs?"
"Easier, but not safer," Lief noted. "In the elf tier, the sphere is located far from the
steps. We would have to walk a great distance to reach it. The deterrent that waits is one
that we would do best to shorten our path."
Ryson scratched his head. "Well, that's the elf tier. What about the tier below us, the
algor tier?"
"It does not matter which entrance we use." It was the algors that responded. "We can
control the danger."
Both algors pulled hand-carved wooden flutes from their packs. They held them up for
all to see, as if they were as powerful as Ryson's sword.


Before midnight, the storm outside Sanctum broke. The rain lessened, reduced from a
constant drizzle to a flickering wave of showers and mist. It finally ceased all together,
leaving behind soaked trees and small puddles within the rock of Sanctum's crust. The
wind died down from northwestern gusts to a warm southerly breeze, and the clouds
rolled clear to the east giving way to the shining multitude of stars.
Matthew marveled at the sight. The white hot specks filled the sky in a way he had
never witnessed before. As the storm clouds passed away, the heavens seemed nearly
painted solid with their fiery glow. Away from the lights and smoking chimneys of
Connel, even the faintest of stars pierced their impression upon the jet black sky. The wet
grass, pine needles, and leaves, mirrored the sparkle from above. To the reader's delight,
the starlight, both original and reflected, chased away the dark gloom that had preceded
their arrival.
Matthew stepped clear of the shelter in the trees that had kept him, Mappel and the
eight remaining algors dry through the storm. He stepped into the open at the base of
Sanctum. Away from the leafy coverage of the surrounding trees, he peered upward
beyond the mountain’s peak to the heavens where the stars greeted him.
He thought of his faith, thought of the ten that sought the sphere. He prayed silently
for the safety of those within the rock before him. He prayed for the success of the
mission, prayed as he had prayed many times that evening, but that was during the gloom
of the storm, when the clouds served as a partition between him and the heavens. Now,
the skies were clear. The sparkling light that now surrounded him convinced him that
these prayers would not be ignored.
With the end of the rain, the sounds of the forest multiplied. The patter of falling water
drops continued as the trapped rain water began to drop from soaked tree leaves. The
dripping rhythm was now accompanied by the music of insects, birds and animals that
relinquished their shelters. The harmony of crickets foreshadowed the lyrical whistles of
the night birds. Twittering raccoons and squeaking bats joined in the chorus. The stars
above twinkled to the symphony as if content spectators during a late night concert.
The natural music was disturbed only by the din of mumbled voices and shuffling
from the shelter behind him. Matthew knew Mappel was conferring with the algors, but
he let them be. If his voice was needed, they would call for him. If not, better he take this
time to appreciate the true glory of Godson.
He stood quietly appreciating the view of the stars hanging over Sanctum. To him, the
heavens shined with greater glory over this bold rock, making the mountain less massive,
less daunting. He smiled as he compared the vastness of the star covered sky against this
now pitiful looking stone edifice. He recalled his feeling of dread when he first saw the
mountain's gnarled rock sides looming through the forest. He remembered wondering
how they might overcome such a monument, but the stars defied Sanctum's size. They
hung high above it, filling the sky, filling space far more encompassing than that which
was seized by this single mountain. They served as a reminder that man's triumphs, man's
constructions, even the symbol of Sanctum as ageless as it was, could be easily matched
and conquered by the true powers that shaped the land, the seas, and the heavens.
His moments of reflection were brought to an end by Mappel's approach from behind.
He took one last glimpse of the view before turning to face the elder elf.
"What were you discussing?" he asked rather aloofly.
"I wish to start my climb," Mappel responded with an edge to his voice. His desires
were as clear as the stars. He wished to reach Sanctum's summit as soon as possible. With
the rain stopped and the stars producing sufficient light, he would wait no longer. "I hope
you will accompany me. The algors wish to stay. They say they will tend to the horses.
They don't believe they should be left alone in the night. They worry that goblins might
strike and steal them or even kill them."
"That's good of them, and of course, I will accompany you," Matthew responded, but
he turned to inspect Sanctum's unwelcoming visage. The wetness of its slopes was
evident in its reflection of the starlight. "But should we not wait? We could rest and begin
our climb at daybreak. It will be less dangerous for us both."
Mappel shook his head sternly. "I doubt either of us could sleep knowing what we
know. Rest will do us no good. As for waiting for the sun, I am hopeful that it will not
take that long for our friends to complete their quest. They reached the summit just
beyond nightfall. Though I only know what waits for them in the elf tier, I can't imagine
their journey would take the entire night. I truly believe if they are successful they will
return before daybreak. I wish to be there to greet them when they emerge."
"What of the climb?" Matthew nodded to Sanctum. "The rock is wet from the rain.
Can we make such an ascent with the ground revealed only by starlight?"
"I am willing to try," Mappel replied steadfast to his decision. "Holli stated she would
leave ropes for us at the most treacherous parts."
"Very well," Matthew conceded. "I won't let you go alone. If one of us gets hurt the
other will need to bring the algors for help."
"Then let us begin," Mappel eyed the closest mountain path. He took one committed
step forward before Matthew requested he hold his unbridled eagerness to start the climb.
"At least, let me retrieve my pack," the reader pointed to the shelter. "I would like for
us to at least have food and water up there, just in case our wait becomes longer than you
anticipate."
Matthew retrieved his pack and wished luck to the algors that would guard the horses.
He had to trot to catch up to Mappel, who would not wait even for a moment. The elf had
stepped lively to Sanctum's base, all the while eyeing its flat peak. His desire to reach it
pressed him with impatience, but the rocky slopes quickly devoured such zeal.
The two struggled to ascend Sanctum. Neither was truly fit nor able for such a climb.
Neither had the algors claws, or a delver's ability, and neither had the strength of youth.
Unlike the group of ten that preceded them, Matthew and Mappel moved slowly,
clumsily up the mountain. With each step their breath became heavier and more labored.
The wet rock increased the strain on their aching calf muscles as they both slipped
numerous times. Even with Mappel's hard-edged resolution to reach the summit, they
both requested breaks at several intervals.
Finally, joyously, they reached the end of the third rope and stood just below the ledge
of Sanctum's flattened peak. A clear path rounded upward and over the last of rock that
blocked their view of the top. Mappel struck upon the path with steady, but pained steps.
The climb had taken much longer than he hoped, and he would delay no longer. He
stepped clear of the last angle of slope and onto level ground. His labored breath, the
trembling ache in his legs and palms, all vanished as there he found what he had hoped to
see.
Glowing pale white, but dimmer than the stars, Mappel betook the view of a spirit, the
form of an elf, the form of Shayed. The ghostly apparition did not face him, did not even
appear aware of his approach. It faced a dark hole in the center of the peak's platform.
Mappel called to the spirit's back.
"Shayed?" he called just above a whisper.
Ingar, still in masquerade, nearly turned with swift anger at the approach of an
intruder, nearly turned with red glowing embers for eyes to smite the invader. His
attention had been placed fully upon the ten within Sanctum. He knew their progress,
knew they stood upon the middle tier. Mappel's call startled him.
In a split second of self-control, he caught himself in mid-turn, saving his charade. He
forced the red glow from his eyes, and carried the true visage of the spirit he portrayed.
He finished his turn slowly and cautiously, to face the newly arrived spectators of Mappel
and Matthew with calm demeanor.
They were not unknown to him. He had seen them when they were with the ten, had
seen them as the true Shayed had envisioned them in the basement at the Church of
Godson. He recognized the elder elf who had taken the reins of leadership during that
time, and he felt the presence of Godson in the reader.
He so desired to scoff at them both, to laugh in their faces as he revealed his true
identity. To smite them into gray ashes with a bolt of red lightning, but he kept his
restraint. He continued the masquerade as he bid them welcome.
"It is good to see you weary travelers. I see you wait as I wait." His words were
masked with kindness and sincerity, while what was left of his soul wished to pull their
hearts from their bodies.
"It is an honor to meet you, Shayed." Mappel bowed. "I am Mappel and this is
Matthew."
"You are both known to me. Those that have passed alerted me to your presence."
"We would have made the climb with the others but we were afraid we might slow
their ascent. That fear would have proven correct. It was not an easy climb for us."
"Nothing is easy in these times." Ingar nearly lost himself. The charade was becoming
amusing. It was beyond simplicity to fool these dolts, to engage in idle banter. He almost
laughed out loud as he bubbled with these false trite sayings, but he continued with an
even tone. "Even now the gravest of tasks becomes necessary to those within."
"You can sense what they do even now? Do you know of their progress?" Growing
hope painted Mappel's words.
Ingar paused, considered how he should answer the question. It might bring him
greater amusement to keep the senile elf in complete darkness. He decided, however, to
reveal the truth, to raise the fool's hopes only to dash them in the end. How fulfilling it
would be to watch all of their faces fill with agony when they finally realized the true
purpose they served.
"They have successfully passed the dwarf tier as well as the human's. They have
reached the delver's tier," the false Shayed revealed.
Both Matthew and Mappel reveled in the news. Smiles blanketed their mouths as the
elf pressed for further information. "That is the tier which holds a mystery for them. How
do they fare?"
"The delver obstacle has been overcome." Again, Ingar had to steady himself to keep
from laughing in the face of these simpletons. How willingly they held to their false
hopes.
"Have any of them suffered any injury?" Matthew asked trying to guard his optimism.
"They all remain unharmed," Ingar revealed, joyously fanning their enthusiasm.
Mappel turned to Matthew with great delight. "Do you hear reader? They are well and
they have overcome the obstacle for which they held no answer. They need but pass only
two tiers now, the algors' and the elve’s. I believe we might yet succeed."
Those words ended Ingar's amusement. Contempt replaced it. He eyed the human and
the elf with renewed disdain. He saw something beyond relief and joy in their faces. He
saw confidence, a dangerous thing, a thing which bred courage. If these pathetic creatures
believed they could overcome Sanctum, they might believe in anything.
At that moment, he considered a possible folly in his plans. What would happen when
they exited Sanctum with the sphere in hand? They would surely give it to him upon his
command, but what would occur next? He would be forced to reveal his intentions, his
charade would be over. Undoubtedly, they would challenge him. Surely his power would
increase while in contact with the sphere, but would it be enough? Confident in
themselves and brought together by their victory over Sanctum, they might attempt to
overcome him. Even with the sphere in his hands, he might be defeated by their
newfound courage.
Worse yet, what if they held to the sphere? What if they denied him the power that
was rightfully his? Might they some how find a way to destroy the sphere before he was
able to drink of its power? He doubted the plausibility of such a contingency, but as he
probed the spirits of the ten within Sanctum, he sensed a growing boldness. Even now
they plotted a way to reach the sphere which would reduce their own risk. Each success
was bringing them closer together, and feeding their will to succeed.
He played out the image of their success in his deranged mind. They would exit free
of Sanctum together. Without distraction, their focus would be placed squarely upon the
sphere and their intention of destroying it. That would indeed be very dangerous to his
plans.
Perhaps it was time to place a burden upon them, to let them know just how
vulnerable their lives truly were. It was now his desire to let those within Sanctum taste
defeat. He wished not to end their quest, but to shake their confidence, to give them a
distraction that would break their thoughts from their ultimate goal.
He linked his own deranged thoughts to the awareness of the sphere, a strange
coupling. The sphere's consciousness was incomplete, less than infantile, and his was
demented. Together, their twisted and incomplete minds gave birth to a single deranged
idea.


Ryson stood uneasily below the dangling rope. His feet were now planted upon the
fourth tier and he stood ready to assist the others that ventured to join him. He made
every effort to keep his attention focused on those that climbed down to his waiting arms,
but the unmoving sand giant to his left made that effort futile.
What seemed only moments ago, the sorceress Lauren had fully recovered from her
fatigue and progress was to continue. To pass to the next level, the algor tier, they had
decided to use the opening created by the sphere rather than the stone steps. Even though
it meant another descent by rope, it stood as a direct path to the sphere itself. They all
agreed, even Tun, that this was the fastest route, and therefore, the wisest decision.
Again, Ryson went first with Dzeb holding the rope. He had moved as a blur,
forewarned by the algors as to what served as the obstacle. They assured him they had the
power to protect the party, but only when they were safely upon the ground with both
hands free. Danger existed to the delver while he stood alone and while the algors
climbed down the rope to join him.
Upon Ryson's plunge, the area below remained clear. The guardians of this tier waited
elsewhere at that moment. It was thus Ryson moved with all of his speed and agility. He
had located a section of ground within the algor tier that was strong enough to support
them, away from yet another hole which led to the final resting place of the sphere. He
had leapt the final distance and turned to bolster the descent of the algors that were so
crucial to his safety. It was there he had ventured, and there where he now stood.
The algors had followed immediately after. They descended one right after another,
climbing downward with the same harmonic movements that brought them out from their
caves in the Lacobian desert. Each left arm moved then each right. The two shimmied
downward in total unison.
It was when the algors still clung to the rope that Ryson had caught the first glimpse of
movement. A stalking presence moving with more resolve than stealth approached from
the broad open end of the tier. Crunching, thudding footsteps resounded through the algor
tier, and announced the approach of a powerful threat.
The delver's acute hearing picked up two distinct marching footfalls. It was just as the
algors had warned. Two giant guardians prowled this tier, one within sight, the other
hidden; two sand giants created to protect the sanctuary of the sphere.
Ryson lacked the time to peer through the darkness to locate the second sentinel, but
the first's presence could not be denied. It had moved full into the light of Ryson's sword,
even as the algors were only half through their descent. It remained a safe distance for the
moment, but it moved forward with casual persistence.
Ryson could not keep his eyes from the forward marching sand sentinel. It appeared
much like Dzeb, not as tall, but large and powerful. A statue carved of sandstone brought
to life an eon ago by the magic of the algors, it was solid and massive. Its movements
defied the nature of its being. The rough sandstone formed every bit of its substance,
from the outer most layer to its inner most core. Ryson could feel the vibration of its
movements course through the floor. Under his breath, he had urged the algors to hurry.
In ten paces, the giant would have been upon him.
Thankfully, it had not run. Instead, when it moved, it stepped with a pounding
steadiness. Time was not an issue for this guardian. It had waited for intruders for the
passing of thousands of seasons, never growing bored, never growing tired. It held no
emotions, not anger and not impatience. It would move based on its single-minded
purpose, to block the path to the lower tier. Yet it was this slow, sure pace that had
allowed the algors to finish their climb before the giant became a true threat to Ryson's
position.
With the algors free of the rope, they produced the wooden flutes they revealed
earlier. They began playing instantly. Soft, high pitched notes flowed gently from their
instruments. Such was the elegance of their playing that it created no echo. The waves of
music filled the cavern with soothing gentleness, not to overcome it with blasting power.
But indeed, great power existed within these notes, power to halt the movements of the
sand giants. The echoing footfalls had vanished into silence.
So now Ryson stood with the frozen giants caught in a spell of the algor music. One of
which remained well in his sights. Even as he waited for the last members of the group to
descend, he could not help glancing at the giant with watchful wariness.
According to the algors, a sand giant did not need a continuous flow of magic to
survive, only an initial blast for its birth. Upon that, it would serve its purpose. Whatever
its instruction, it would remain forever, attacking all that ventured near that did not know
the song.
The song, however, was played true by the algors and the giants remained as still as
the stone they were made of. Their stillness led to the entry of even more, for Ryson and
the algors were joined by the elves and the dwarves. Only Stephen, Lauren, and Dzeb
remained upon the delver tier. Ryson signaled for the interpreter to begin his descent. As
Stephen took hold of the rope, it appeared as if they would pass the fourth tier without
great difficulty and move within but one obstacle of Ingar's talisman.
Such hope was shattered immediately and senselessly with a low toned groan that
hummed up from the depths of Sanctum. It came with a burst, this howling guttural tone,
and it filled the inside of Sanctum with raging ferocity. Everyone within Sanctum jumped
at the impact of the sound. Even the docile cliff behemoth nearly lost hold of the rope
which Stephen clung to. The algors, knowing the need for their music, continued to play,
but they could not overcome the noise which now stormed Sanctum's internal core.
The sand giants stirred.
The algors closed their eyes, filled their lungs and blew into their flutes with all of
their might, but the melody was crashed upon like the surf pounds the sand. Not a single
note broke free.
The closest giant began to move forward once more.
The delver spied the giant first.
"They're moving!" he screamed to be heard. His eyes shifted from the stalking sentinel
to the algors. They continued to play but even he could not hear their music. He glanced
upwards to Stephen who remained helpless in the air. "Climb back up!" he shouted.
Stephen looked down with confusion. He could not hear above the din of the roar.
Ryson pointed back up to the hole fiercely, illustrating his words with signals. Stephen
understood and finally reversed his climb. Ryson remained below the rope to ensure
Stephen's escape even as the sand giant moved unhesitatingly toward him.
Holli pulled her bow clear of her shoulder and yelled orders, but the droning hum
made her words inaudible to all. She screamed them again, but only Lief who stood
beside her could understand. With the sand giant moving dangerously close to Ryson, she
strung an arrow and let it fly. It found its mark at the sentinel's round forehead, but it only
scratched the stone before bouncing away. Lief joined her in a second attempt, but again
both arrows failed to even slow the giant.
Ryson turned his attention back and forth from the closing guardian to Stephen, who
dangled from the rope overhead. The delver's head twitched like a pendulum on a
grandfather clock. He would not move from his spot until Stephen was safely back with
Dzeb and Lauren.
He snatched up the sword from the ground at his feet, the blade washed all directions
with light, but the point jutted out squarely in the sand sentinel's direction. Ryson did not
know what to expect if a clash occurred. He knew the Sword of Decree held a power
beyond the sharpness of its blade. He recalled how it burned the hide of the spider-crab
near the Lacobian desert. He hoped it would have the same effect now, for he could not
fathom how else the blade might stop a creature composed purely of stone.
Stephen remained a full arm's length from the ledge above as the stone giant
approached within danger limits. Only the length of the sword divided Ryson from the
guardian, and it seemed oblivious to the weapon. It began to raise its arms past the blade
and toward Ryson's head. Three round, thick fingers and one massive thumb extended
threateningly forward.
The three fingered shadow broke across Ryson's face. He could smell the mustiness of
age covering the sandstone digits. With the interpreter still hanging from the rope, the
delver remained unwilling to attempt escape. He prepared for attack, to keep the giant
away from the rope. He turned his shoulders slightly and planted his feet. He pulled the
blade back swiftly and prepared to strike at the center of its thick arm.
Just as the delver resigned himself to swinging his blade, the circumstances changed.
In the conscious flash of comprehending movement above, Ryson held his attack. He
withdrew the blade and with swiftness to make even the fastest rabbit envious, he darted
clear of the sand giant.
With one mighty tug on the rope, Dzeb had pulled Stephen up and onto the ledge
above. The interpreter was safely upon solid ground and in no danger of falling. It was
this which Ryson had seen and understood. With Stephen clear of danger, flight was now
an acceptable option.
The giant was left to grasp empty air, but it displayed not the slightest displeasure.
Without delay, it washed a glance over all that now stood upon the algor tier. It moved
forward with its single purpose, not dwelling upon the minor setback. It was a being of
one desire, one mission, to stop all intruders. It did not experience frustration or anger. It
did not comprehend defeat. The sentinel refocused its attack upon the delver and altered
its path to intercept.
Ryson noted the adjustments and again stood ready to dodge an assault. He kept a
watchful glance on all that was around him, marking in his mind the positions of
everyone else. He noticed Holli barking commands again, but her voice still would not
overcome the blaring hum.
Unable to discern her wishes, he set upon his own motives. He would keep the giant
occupied and away from the others. He would serve as the decoy, remaining close
enough to keep the giant's attention, but far enough to guarantee his own safety.
With but a few movements, he noted the most important aspects of the giant's tactics.
Its steady patience assured it would follow the delver without turning upon another. Its
purpose to stop progress down the tier guaranteed it would follow Ryson as long as he
was perceived as the one most willing to move. He would continue to tempt the giant,
occupy it and influence it, until someone discovered a way to end the sand giant's threat.
Moving carefully toward more open space, away from the others, away from the rent
in the floor, he stepped carefully down toward the center of the tier. He kept his sword in
hand, bringing light to more of the chamber as he traveled. The area offered no other
hindrance. The ground was level, and except for support pillars, it remained clear of
obstacles and debris, perfect for a delver to outmaneuver any creature. The guard
followed obediently. It ignored the others, especially as they made no attempt to follow,
but its aggression toward Ryson amplified. Its movements increased in speed and
dexterity as if aware that the further Ryson moved down the tier the more he threatened
the guardian's objective. While it could not match the delver in agility, it would not rest
until the invader was neutralized.
Even as Ryson dodged numerous attacks, he had not forgotten the second giant that
loomed somewhere further off in the distance. With the raucous buzz still filling the
cavern, he could no longer hear footsteps. It was thus necessary to visually pinpoint the
second guardian's position. When the moment allowed, he took a long glance and spotted
the second giant waiting at the opposite end of the tier. It stood directly between Ryson
and the door to the next level as if a final obstacle, a security measure in case the intruder
outmaneuvered the first giant. It made no attempt to join the fray, thus Ryson remained
content with circling about his current position and keeping the first guardian safely away
from the others.
Utilizing the respite afforded to her by the delver's actions, Holli pulled upon the
sleeves of the dwarves as well as Lief. Tun pulled his arm away as if insulted, but
followed her intentions. She brought them along side the algors, circling close together.
She shouted hoarsely over the continuing disturbance. "Ryson will occupy the sand
giant, but we move no closer to the sphere." She strained to be heard as she held up two
fingers. "We have but two options - remove the noise or remove the giants."
"The sound comes from below," Lief responded, his neck bulging from the pressure of
his shouts.
"The sphere?" Holli questioned keeping her phrases short and mouthing her words
firmly to help convey them.
"Yes," Lief nodded strongly. "It must know we're here. A defensive move."
Holli shifted her darting eyes about the cave seeking an answer. She looked down the
hole in the floor to the next tier. A direct path existed to the sphere of Ingar, but one
obstacle remained, the elfin obstacle. Darkness covered that which waited, but she knew
what stood between them and the talisman.
"To reach the sphere, we need the delver, but he is best suited to keep the guardians at
bay."
Lief shook his head. "What?"
"We can not get the sphere without Ryson," Holli repeated.
"What chance have we of that?" Lief questioned.
"Either someone else must occupy the giant or we must destroy it," Holli yelled.
Lief turned to the algors. "Is there anyway to stop them?"
"Only the music," the algors responded together.
Lief and Holli barely heard the answer. They acknowledged it with a shrug. "It seems
we must destroy them," Lief yelled hastily back at the algors. "Can you take away the
power that brought them to life?"
The algors did not hear the full question and the elf was forced to shout it in repetition.
Upon finally understanding, the algors simply shook their heads in denial.
Holli took a long moment to size up their new adversary. She sought weaknesses to be
exploited, but found only the lack of true speed. Otherwise, the sand giant appeared
invulnerable. Her analysis was cut short by the swift turn of the elder dwarf.
"Bah, this is madness," Tun mumbled in an ordinary voice and was thus not heard by
those that stood about him. He set off toward the sand giant with haste in his step.
His sudden decision caught the others off guard. They watched first in confusion, then
in dismay as the prince stormed forward down the tier.
Holli, Lief and Jon called for Tun to stop. If he heard them, he ignored them. His
intentions became clear as he unhitched the maul from his belt.
"No!" Jon screamed and broke into a charge to halt his brother.
Holli and Lief followed almost immediately. Their great speed pressed them quickly
beyond Jon, but as if in response, Tun fell into a gallop of his own. It became all too
evident that they would not reach him in time.
Tun's eyes narrowed, his brow knitted. He brought his arms back, both hands tightly
gripping the handle of his maul. The sharpened edge pointed at the giant. His mouth
opened wide with a yell that actually surpassed the volume of the sphere's hum.
The war cry surprised Ryson, who leapt clear of the onrushing dwarf. It was too late
for him to intervene as he identified Tun's body leaping through the air. He stood well out
of reach as the metal blade of the dwarf weapon swung violently through the air. It
crashed into the sand giant with enough force to crumble a brick wall, with enough power
to actually cause a fissure in the giant's chest, but not with enough might to vanquish the
sentinel.
The weapon embedded itself in the very center of the giant and Tun held to it with the
same ferocity in which he swung. His feet dangled from the ground, levitated by his hold
on the axe and the sand giant's height. He pulled to free his weapon, but with no
footholds, he lacked the leverage. He swung both legs forward and upward and actually
drove the soles of his boots into the chest of the sentinel. He crouched into a ball, planted
firmly upon the midsection of the sand giant. He pressed down hard with his feet as he
pulled upon the weapon. Slowly, grudgingly, it loosened. He rocked back and forth,
pushing and pulling, pressing and yanking. The blade moved back and forth, more of the
blade worked free, but still it remained embedded in the sandstone.
The giant suffered no pain, not from the strike and not from Tun's efforts to rock the
blade free. Its blank eyes fell upon the dwarf as if Tun were nothing more than a fly
buzzing around its head. Almost defying the dwarf's existence, the giant remained more
watchful of the delver. Its focus quickly left the dwarf and again seized Ryson. The
delver did not move.
Others, however, were rushing forward. The sand giant swerved about to meet them.
More intruders were progressing down the tier and threatening to pass. The sentinel could
not have this and it moved to intercept. It took a path which would set itself to meet the
onrushing pack while maintaining a presence between the delver and the far end of the
tier. It ignored Tun even as the dwarf continued his attempt to free his blade.
With the sand giant's altered movements, the elves came to a halt. They held their
bows, though they knew the weapon was useless. Further, with Tun still attached to its
chest, it made the use of arrows more dangerous than beneficial. Holli yelled over the
continuing crescendo for Lief to spread apart. They sidestepped in opposite directions
just as Jon reached them.
The younger dwarf pulled to a halt, his mace still in his belt. He stared at the spectacle
of Tun upon the giant's chest. He could not withhold his alarm and for one of the very
few times in his life, he yelled an order to his older brother. "Tun, let go of the maul!"
Tun simply growled a refusal.
"Don't be a fool!" Jon persisted.
The remark brought Tun's wrath. He yelled with enough anger to be heard by all. "The
giant must be destroyed! It breaks beneath the blade. It will crumble upon my next swing.
I will use the sledge."
As if to exclaim his point, the blade broke free of the giant's hide. With the weapon
clear and nothing to hold his weight, Tun tumbled backward to the ground. The
momentum of his fall sent him several paces away from the giant. He hit the ground in a
tangled, uncoordinated heap, but struck to his feet as the tumble caused him no harm or
injury.
He twirled the maul in his hands and now allowed the blunt end to face menacingly
toward the giant. He would not repeat his mistake. The back end of the maul, shaped like
a sledge hammer, would not embed itself into the giant like the axe head. It would
pulverize the sentinel.
Again, the dwarf charged the sand giant. Again, he pulled back his arms ready to lend
a powerful swing to the momentum of his onslaught. The heavy head of the maul crashed
upon the giant's hip, sending fragments of sandstone in every direction. The sledge broke
clear of the giant, leaving a gash the size of Tun's head behind, just above the sentinel's
left leg.
The giant shook from the blow. Its feet stayed firmly planted, but the loss of so much
of its form left it somewhat off balance. The injury caused it no pain. It did not even
examine the crater left in its hip. There was no loss of blood, no damage to the muscle,
for the giant had neither. It was comprised entirely of stone, and the gash proved that
point.
The blow, other than weakening the sentinel's equilibrium, caused one other
significant reaction. The sand giant reassessed its evaluation of the dwarf as a threat.
While it had no concept of self-preservation, it understood if it was destroyed, it could
not protect the passage to the next tier. Such was its awareness that it decided to end the
life of the dwarf.
With swiftness diametrically opposed to its makeup of stone, it plucked Tun from the
ground. The dwarf still held his weapon, even managed to haul his arms back for another
strike, but such was no concern of the sentinel's. With both of its hands firmly holding the
dwarf just above the waist, it squeezed as it brought its hands together. Tun would not
scream, but a nauseating pop echoed through the tier and signaled his end. The giant
discarded the dwarf like a sack of rotten fruit.
Tun was tossed several paces and hit the ground with rolling momentum. The rattle of
his bones could not overcome the sound of the low groan emitted by the sphere, but those
that watched witnessed the crumpled, disjointed gyrations of his body. Tun never felt the
snapping of his bones, the breaking of his legs and arms, for he was already dead.
Jon, and now even the algors, rushed to the fallen dwarf. As Jon checked for signs of
life, the algors attempted to spread their healing power over their fallen comrade. To no
avail, the power of the algor was to heal not to restore life.
Holli, Lief and Ryson found no time to check upon Tun's condition. The attack upon
the dwarf filled each with rage. Holli and Lief again fired arrows, choosing the eyes of
the giant as their aim. Each struck the intended target, but the eyes were made of stone
just as the rest of it. The arrows bounced away leaving no damage.
Ryson held tightly to the handle of his sword. He rushed forward, zigzagging in a
swarm of motion and speed. He drove around the sentinel, quickly darting about with
twists and turns. The giant attempted to seize the delver as well, but each time it reached
out, it obtained nothing but the breeze left behind by Ryson's movements. As the delver
circled, he stabbed and swung the blade of his sword at the guardian. The blade cut
through the air like a hundred daggers. It struck upon the giant with precision, but there
was no effect.
Ryson lacked the strength of the dwarf and could not break the stone as Tun had
accomplished. More disturbing, however, was the lack of the flame from this magical
sword. Ryson expected the blade to light with the same fire which destroyed the spidercrab. It did not. Each time it struck the sentinel, it impacted with no more power than an
ordinary blade.
The lack of effect brought an end to the delver's attack. He broke off the encounter,
ran to Holli's side for an explanation. Just as he reached her, a soul wrenching wail
exploded over the droning hum. It tore his attention away from the elf, away from the
sword, and placed it upon the cry's origin.
Jon knelt beside his brother, Tun's head in his lap. Jon was still wailing as the algors
rose and turned away. The scene struck at Ryson, tore at his soul.

Outside Sanctum, at its peak, Ingar laughed to himself. He kept his glee hidden from
Matthew and Mappel but he drank in the desperation, the anguish which now rose from
the inner depths.
The party within Sanctum now knew despair. They knew failure, and they knew
death.

Only Holli managed to force the image from her mind. With a watchful eye upon the
sand giant, she moved clear of the delver and began leading the sentinel away. She would
not allow the sand giant the opportunity to catch any of them unaware. She even ignored
the entrance of the cliff behemoth.
A loud thud announced Dzeb's arrival. He leapt to the algor tier the instant after Jon
released his cry of sorrow. The ground shook as he landed, but he took no notice. He
scanned the scene before him and his eyes set upon Tun and Jon. All that could see him
saw the grief in his face.
Strange, so very strange for all to witness. The cliff behemoth held such
indistinguishing features. Everything about the face was so simple, as if a clay model
constructed by a child of three. The nearly invisible mouth, the small pudgy nose, the
simple roundness of his head; a perfect rendering could have been drawn by the most
novice of artists. There was such simplicity it seemed as if powerful expression was
nearly impossible. Yet, that was so far from the truth, a truth that became undeniable, for
to look in that face was to see true pain, true sorrow.
Dzeb turned that look of sorrow into a look of unyielding vengeance as he turned his
gaze upon the sentinel that caused the dwarf's death. Like a crusader filled with resolve to
smite the heretics, Dzeb marched forcibly forward. His eyes held the sand giant with
indignity. This thing was an abomination to Dzeb, a cheap replication of life, an insult to
Godson. He set upon it with but one purpose of his own.
The sand giant met Dzeb with its own single-mindedness. It did not care that this new
intruder was larger than it. It stepped up to block and intercept just as it had done with all
the others. It reached out with the same intention as when it grabbed Tun, but not with the
same result.
Dzeb brushed away the arms of the sand giant as if they were made of nothing more
than tissue paper. The cliff behemoth's own powerful fingers thrust into the fissure left
behind by Tun's axe. Dzeb forced both of his hands deeper and deeper into the crevice.
Suddenly, furiously, Dzeb pulled his hands apart, ripping the sentinel in two.
Pieces of sandstone exploded into the air as the sand giant broke first into two separate
distinct pieces and then crumbled. An orange glow of magical residue fizzled in the
rubble, and then disappeared.
Dzeb paid no mind to the magic or the fragments. His angry stare shot further down
the tier and seized upon the second sentinel. He marched forward with the same fitful
determination. His thunderous steps could still be heard over the rankled hum.
Ryson followed, giving a wide berth and maintaining a large buffer of space. The light
of his sword filled the chamber where the second sentinel stood. This guardian also
moved up to halt the progress of the cliff behemoth, as if the destruction of its partner
meant nothing.
Again, Dzeb handled the sand giant as if it were nothing more than a rag doll. He
pushed aside all advances and took hold of the sentinel at the waist. He picked it up clear
off the ground and held it high over his head. Dzeb threw the sand giant down with
enough force to shake the very walls of this tier. As it hit, much of it broke apart, but
enough of its form remained to hold the magic. That was ended with one mighty stomp of
Dzeb's foot. The sandstone became dust and again orange magic fizzled away into the air.
In the same instant, the wild drone which eclipsed the algors' music ceased, ending as
abruptly as it began. The only sound to fill the cavern was Jon's moans of despair.
Dzeb turned away from the dust, stepped back toward Ryson as if the sand giant never
existed. The two moved with care towards the two dwarves. Holli and Lief also gathered
around. None need ask, for Tun's fatal wounds were as obvious as Jon's grief, but Ryson
posed a question to the algors.
"You can't help him?"
"We can heal great wounds," they answered in unison, "but we can not revive the
dead."
The statement brought a wince of pain to more than one. They stood uneasily,
searching for words of comfort, searching for wisdom to explain the mysteries of life and
death.
Lief mumbled something. He appeared uncomfortable with his thoughts, not sure of
how to word a proposal growing in his own mind. He spoke guardedly.
"Maybe Shayed can help." He paused, attempted to organize his proposal into its
simplest terms. He continued quickly, almost babbling. "Shayed has returned from the
dead. I know she's only a spirit, but we have Tun's body. Do you think it may be possible
that she might know of a way to revive him?"
The algors responded first. "Healing is difficult enough. The replenishing of life seems
impossible."
"We've already accomplished much of what was thought impossible," Holli countered.
"Only Godson can give life," Dzeb said earnestly. He spoke not with hostility, but
with the belief of his own convictions.
"It's only a thought," Lief offered nearly defensively.
"But it is a chance we should consider," Ryson added.
They stood about their fallen comrade uneasily, indecisively. Holli forced the issue
forward. "The decision is Jon's to make. He is your brother, Jon. I can not tell you what is
right. I can only state he died proudly, sacrificing himself to save others."
"He died foolishly," Jon erupted with bitterness edging his words. "If there is a chance
to revive him, it should be attempted."
"Very well." Holli took complete command and issued the most practical solution. "If
it is to be attempted, time may be critical. Jon you must take your brother back to the
summit. I will accompany you, as will one of the algors and one of the humans. The rest
will go on to recover the sphere."
"We will both go," the algors stated firmly. "If the dwarf can be revived, it will take
both of our power to heal the injuries he sustained."
"If you wish. I only thought one of you might wish to see the mission to its
conclusion."
"We are of no more use to you," the two replied. "The threat of the algor tier is
passed."
"It may be a good idea to have both Stephen and Lauren leave now as well," Lief
proposed. "You know what waits for us below, Holli. They are not suited with the
strength or the speed to handle it."
"You are right, but it is their decision. I will speak with them of it."
"Wait a moment," Ryson interceded. "I'm not against giving Tun this chance, but we
still have to bring the sphere out of here. How can we get back to the top if we don't have
Lauren to protect us from the poison in the human tier or Jon to lead us through the traps
in the dwarf level?"
"We no longer have to pass those tiers," Holli stated resolutely. "The tunnel carved
through the side of Sanctum will provide our exit. It passes through at the tier overhead,
the delver tier. As you have told us, there is no danger there."
"But the barrier at the end of the tunnel ..."
Lief interrupted the delver. "The barrier only serves to keep us out. It will not keep us
in. Magical fields must be like that, otherwise they would trap those they were meant to
protect. If wizards could not send their spells, whether material or immaterial, through the
field, they would serve no purpose."
"It is decided," Holli stated firmly. "Jon, do you need help in carrying your brother?"
The dwarf did not speak through his grief. He simply stood and pulled the corpse of
his brother up on his shoulder.
Ryson, Dzeb and Lief first watched silently as the others took to the stone steps which
led to the original entrance of this tier in order to climb back to the level above. As they
disappeared through the door, the three moved back to the opening blasted by the sphere.
Ryson considered the recent events with the inherent analysis of a delver. He puzzled
over Tun's attack upon the sand giant which led to the dwarf's death. He wondered why
this doubting, disagreeable individual would take it upon himself to clear a path for
others which he claimed to mistrust.
Another's actions also puzzled Ryson. He remembered the uncaring stare of the cliff
behemoth as he marched upon the first sentinel. He recalled the ferocity in which Dzeb
stamped out the life of the second sand giant, as well. The viciousness of both attacks
seemed so out of character for this docile being and the following lack of remorse
reinforced the mystery. The cliff behemoth's actions served to create questions in the
delver's mind, questions he was compelled to ask.
"Dzeb? Why did you kill them, the sand giants I mean? I thought you would be
against something like that?"
Dzeb's expression softened. He even found a smile as he looked into the inquisitive
eyes of the delver. "I am against killing, but I did not take a life today. The sand giants
are not a creation of Godson. They were given life falsely."
"But they moved they seemed to be aware of us. Doesn't that constitute some form of
life?"
"It is nothing more than animation," Dzeb insisted. "The guardians were made of
stone, nothing more, nothing less. Magic animated the rock, gave them the appearance of
life, but they were never alive."
"Just like the corpse that attacked me when this all started," Ryson said.
Dzeb made no comment of the undead.
"Never alive," Ryson repeated introspectively. "That might explain why my sword
failed to affect the creatures."
"I can give little explanation as to the workings of your sword. Magic is a difficult
thing to explain. Is it a blessing of Godson, is it a force of its own? The debate will rage
until Godson sees fit to give us the answer."
The conversation was brought to a halt by Holli's call from above. She squatted at the
blast opening which broke through to the delver tier. She stuck her head out so as to be
seen by those below.
"Both Lauren and Stephen have decided to exit now. I have told them of the obstacle
of the last tier and they agree they would only serve to hamper your efforts. Stephen also
believes it is time for the group to separate. It was not quite a vision, more of a feeling
that only you three should proceed. I have inspected the tunnel that breaches Sanctum’s
wall from this tier. It will not be a difficult climb. The rest of us will exit that way and
await your return at the summit. There we shall see if Shayed may assist Tun."
"Good luck," Ryson yelled out.
"To you, too. To all of you."
Her words carried more than a passing gesture of farewell. She spoke as if they
needed the luck she wished upon them, as if only providence might see them through this
last tier. The last visage of her expression held a mourning glance, as if she believed she
might never seem them again.
Ryson turned to Lief for an explanation. "She sounded almost as if she doesn't expect
us to make it."
"She expects us to succeed," Lief corrected. "Though she is aware that what we must
pass will probably haunt us forever."
Ryson turned and faced the shattered hole in the floor. He peered into the opening for
the first time, but saw nothing other than different shades of black. It was not like the
void at the outset of the dwarf tier. This darkness was not whole or complete. It was not a
single pure curtain of dark, but a mixture of shadow upon shadow. Nothing reflected the
light of his sword, though the glow appeared to lighten the area closest to him. Still, even
that which stood directly in the path of his sword's light remained hollow of illumination.
His night vision was also useless. He could discern nothing within the darkness other
than the shifting shades of black.
"What's down there?" He wondered aloud. "I don't see anything but shadows."
"That is what waits," Lief said with a cold chill running through his voice. "Shadow
trees."


Lief's voice, his expression, the emotion in his words carried the true dread of what
lay in wait. His eyes drooped hollow, not from fatigue but from anticipation of the last
leg of the journey. He peered through the rent upon the shifting shadows. He knew of the
shadow trees, the horror connected with them. He, as most elves, knew his people still
controlled the seeds, though he never believed they would ever use them again. They
were beyond evil. They represented utter destruction, a weapon thats very existence bred
fear as well as doom. He shook his head, as for the first time in his own lifetime, he
witnessed the elves' most abominable legacy.
Shame filled him as he spoke of the shadow trees. "The elves have always viewed the
trees with great respect, but I won't deny the truth when it comes to the history of our
wars. We can be as cruel as any others. So cruel as to forcibly alter the trees themselves
into the most horrible of weapons. It was a war with the dwarves that led to the creation
of the shadow trees, a war my people were determined to win no matter what the
consequence."
Lief's mind swelled with images of the legends, of what he knew from elflore. He
thought of the ancient war with the dwarves. He found the need to explain it to both Dzeb
and Ryson, a precursor to the confession of the sin of his race.
"Before the sphere, before Ingar, a conflict arose which even now will breed tension
between allies. I am not aware of the cause of the conflict. That is apparently as much a
secret as were the barriers placed within Sanctum. The actual war occurred so long ago
that not even an elf remains alive that remembers the cause. The legend of the fighting,
however, will live on forever.
"At the onset of the war, the dwarves were merciless. This by no means justifies the
elves later actions, but it might help you understand them. The dwarves held a great
advantage over the elves with their ability to use the ground in battle tactics. They would
tunnel beneath elf camps and break through the surface at night, killing all. Elves would
send war parties into the tunnels to extract revenge only to be trapped by cave-ins.
"It was this tunneling tactic which led to the elves making use of the trees in their
daily lives. Traveling through the trees offered safety from the ground and from a dwarf
warrior who might break through in a mere instant. The dwarves could not climb with
any proficiency, so if the elves remained off the ground they remained relatively safe.
"Infuriated by this tactic, the dwarves began attacking the roots of the trees. They
believed if they destroyed the forests around the elf camps, the elves would be forced
back to the ground. Their scouts would locate camps, and their workers would
immediately set upon destroying the roots of the trees. The elves watched in horror as the
trees began to fall over with no root system to hold them in place. Elves began dying
again, killed from terrible falls, crushed or impaled by breaking branches.
"This treachery stirred such hate in the elves it pressed them to devise a way to not
only end the war, but to punish the dwarves. Elf generals would not be satisfied until they
found a way to bring utter fear to every living dwarf. If the dwarves would attack elf
homes, then the elf guard would find a way to destroy the dwarf underground cities. By
no means do I wish to excuse or understate their actions. Every elf must accept the truth.
It was the elf intention to create a weapon that would bring nightmares to the dwarves.
Their anger pushed them to such lengths as to create the shadow trees.
"Remember, this war occurred before Ingar and his sphere. Magic still resided over
the land. The magic was used with the elves' great knowledge of nature to produce the
end result. Elf sorcerers and elf naturalists worked together on cross breeding and
magically altering the seeds of different trees. Their efforts proved quite successful.
"They developed a tree which did not feed upon the light, but upon darkness. That is
all it needed. It did not need water and did not produce roots. It stood upon a flat solid
base, but not attached to the ground. Thus, it could move. It would grow like a weed,
suffocating out all other life. The darker the surroundings, the faster it would grow. A
single seed would grow to maturity in less than half a season within a dark cave. If it was
chopped down, its remains would produce more trees. It would spread like wild ivy,
filling all open space. It was this dreadful creation that the elves used upon the dwarves."
He stopped to consider the vast differences between the trees he loved, and the
atrocities which waited below. He would have given near anything at that moment to see
the streaming vines of a willow, or the proud leaves of an oak, but such a whim was not
possible within the dark confines of Sanctum's core. He continued, speaking through tight
lips.
"Hundreds of the seeds were dropped down air vents into the dwarf capital of
Kendren. Reports from dwarves that were lucky enough to escape revealed the power of
this new weapon. In the meager light of the underground city, the trees grew quickly. The
dwarves attacked them with their axes, but as I said, that only brought them more trees.
Other facets of the trees became clear as they seized the city. As they began to consume
all of the available space, they began to consume living creatures around them as well.
The thick dark limbs would wrap around the captured dwarves, turning and shifting until
the dwarf disappeared into the depths of its shadows.
"The trees also began feeding upon themselves. Yes, apparently inherently
cannibalistic, the trees would consume each other. Size meant nothing. Small trees would
devour large trees, large trees would consume small. What it did mean was more food.
"The increase in consumption led to an increase in growth rate as well as
reproduction. One tree might have eaten another, but nearly instantly it would drop a
dozen more seeds that would germinate that same day. The trees were also reaching
maturity in days.
"The only known weakness of the shadow trees was direct light. Not manufactured
light, not firelight, but natural light from the sun and stars. The underground cities,
however, lacked such light. There was some. Sunlight was reflected through air holes and
tunnels through the use of gemstones such as those used this night by Jon, but it was not
enough. The city was too far underground, the light too weak. The reflected beams would
only spare small areas from the onslaught of the shadow trees. The rest of the city could
not be saved.
"Unable to stop the growth of the shadow trees, the dwarves sealed all points of entry
to Kendren, including the smallest of air holes. Apparently many dwarves were buried
alive, but there was no way to get to them to save them."
Lief's voice turned colder, revealing he found no pride in the war's conclusion.
"The dwarves were forced to sue for peace. They could not fight the trees, and
continued use of them would end their existence. The elves won the war, but even today
we realize there was no honor in that victory."
Lief stared into the hole before them, into the shifting shadows that waited below. "To
this day, we still have seeds remaining from that war. We argue constantly over what to
do with them. Most say they are too dangerous to hold onto. Others argue they maintain
peace between the dwarves and the elves. Without them, they say the dwarves would
consider renewing their attacks. Even as elves and dwarves continue to trade, make
treaties, and share resources this day, I doubt either will ever truly trust the other.
"In any event, it has been revealed to me this night that the elves placed shadow trees
as their defense of the elfin tier. This is the secret which Mappel held to, the secret he
revealed to me and Holli on this night. I can only explain as it was explained to me.
"When Sanctum was constructed and the elves were asked to put the first barrier about
the sphere, the shadow trees seemed to be the perfect solution." Lief stuck out a long thin
finger and pointed into the heart of the opening, into the depths of the darkness. "That is
not only the last tier, it is the resting place of the sphere. There are no more levels below.
The elves were given the greatest responsibility of Sanctum, the last line of defense.
"The elves in charge, however, were concerned with one other concern. They had to
consider the threat of tunneling to get to the sphere. Only the dwarves had the power to
tunnel through the granite rock beneath Sanctum and break through the diamond sheets
that protect the floor and walls. Though the dwarves appeared most enthusiastic over
entombing the sphere, the mistrust between elf and dwarf again resurfaced. The shadow
trees would be used as a guarantee that no dwarf would ever enter the final tier. As I said,
it seemed the perfect solution."
Ryson peered long and hard into the reaches of the shadows in the tier below. He let
his eyes adjust slowly to the shifting blackness. He let his ears tune to the nearly
inaudible shuffling. As his senses bore down upon the shadows, he began to see the
nightmare as it was explained to him.
The attributes of individual trees slowly became distinguishable. The deviant shades
of the darkness were but the opposing distances between different trees. He could isolate
thick black trunks as well as discern stunted jagged branches. The branches were filled at
their tips by what appeared to be thick, dark sludge. It dripped off as the trees shifted.
There appeared to be constant movement directly below. The trees closest to the opening,
the ones now bathed in Ryson's light, seemed determined to escape the illumination.
The delver witnessed more than one being seized upon by another tree waiting further
off in the darkness. Thick but pliable branches of the attacker wrapped around the
intended victim. Expanding as they encircled about the trunk of the captured tree, the
branches exhibited a consistency more like that of soft rubber than of natural wood. The
attacking tree pulled the ensnared tree closer and closer to its center. As the two trunks
met, they merged into one. The remaining tree stood somewhat taller and slightly thicker
as it dropped a clump of seeds from its outer most branches to the ground.
The sight did little to encourage Ryson of their chances. "How are we supposed to get
through that?"
"The way is in your hand," Lief said nodding to the sword. "The sword's ability to
reflect natural light allows the carrier to fend off the advance of any shadow tree.
Apparently, the Sword of Decree was created when the decision was made to place the
seeds of shadow trees into Sanctum. Though not every elf is a magic caster, every elf has
the ability to store magical energies. Even when the sphere sucked pure magic from the
world, it could not take that which each elf stored in his body. This stored energy, the last
vestige of magic for the elves that worked in Sanctum, was used to create the Sword of
Decree.
"The sword was given the power to reflect the light no matter how meager, to magnify
natural light in such a way as to keep the shadow trees at bay. In the process, it carried
the power to be more than a sword, but a flaming weapon with the power to burn truly
living creatures.
"That is how I have known it, a weapon with no equal in its power to defend. That is
why Mappel wished you to take it with you in your search for the algors."
"That's also why he wanted me to safeguard it," Ryson added. "He wanted to protect
me in the hills and the desert, but he knew the sword would be needed for the final
assault on Sanctum. No wonder he made me vow to take such care of it."
"Indeed, its purpose was clear to him at the time," Lief admitted. "I can only assume
he balanced the need of you reaching the algors safely with the need of the sword for this
moment."
Ryson examined the length of his sword as he asked yet another question. "How was it
that your camp came in possession of the sword?"
"That I cannot answer. Again, until this night, I lacked the knowledge of what was in
Sanctum and the sword's true origin. If I had to guess, I might reply that it has much to do
with my camp's proximity to Sanctum."
"You know, a lot of this doesn't make sense," Ryson questioned as he attempted to
place an order upon this sequence of events. "Why would the elves create something
which could defeat the shadow trees if they were using them to protect the sphere? I
mean, the sphere was a great threat to the elves. Why would they create an object which
might one day be used to overcome their own obstacle?"
Lief revealed his own confusion over the matter. "It is difficult for me to understand. I
knew of the sword’s power, but I did not know its true origin because I did not know the
secret of Sanctum."
Dzeb strangely announced a thought in the form of a parable. "If a man locks a jewel
in a vault, does he do so without memorizing the combination?"
Lief seemed to struggle with the near whimsical assertion.
Ryson verbalized his own questions over the cliff behemoth's statement. "You think
the elves wanted to have a key to get back in, even back then?"
"We are in need of that key now," Dzeb replied simply.
Lief responded with conviction. "I must disagree with that thought. I can't believe any
of the elves wanted to see the sphere removed."
"You wish to see the sphere removed now, do you not?" Dzeb looked to Lief
expectantly, knowingly.
"But now we have no choice."
"You find it so impossible that the power of Godson could not foresee this eventual
need."
"I don't know," Lief conceded. "I no longer know what to make of any of this. There
were no prophecies of the sphere's return, not in the Book of Godson and not in elflore,
yet here I stand in Sanctum near the end of our quest. I don't even wish to try and
consider what might be guiding us. I only know we have but one tier left."
"Then let us be finished with that one as well," Dzeb remarked evenly. "How is it you
recommend we proceed?"
Lief exhaled as he swallowed the memories of the elf-dwarf war. He focused upon the
rent in the floor. "We can descend from here into the tier. The trees will give way to the
light as even now they struggle to move back into the darkness. As long as the light
remains with us, they will not attack. Ryson can climb down first. I will follow. Then,
Dzeb can jump down to join us.
"The true burden must be carried by the one who holds the sword," Lief said as he
placed his eyes squarely upon the delver. "Your weapon is the only thing that will keep
us alive down there. It is the only thing which will force the trees to part from our path. I
must ask you to keep your attention upon one most important task. You must always keep
the point of the sword toward the opening where the light enters. You must never slip in
your concentration of this single duty. The sword was forged so that the light reflected
from the point would fashion a tightly concentrated beam. This beam is the life-line
between the sword and the light source. If it is broken by a careless swing or a drop in
concentration, the shadow trees will have the opportunity to block out the light. As you
now know, the sword does not create light, it simply reflects it. If the trees are successful
in completely surrounding us, sealing us off from the light, the illumination from the
sword will end. We will have no defense against the trees. They will eventually
overpower us all, even Dzeb."
"That doesn't make me feel too comfortable," Ryson admitted. "Once we jump down
into the tier, we have to move forward to reach the sphere. As we move, we'll be walking
away from the hole."
"It will not cause a problem as long as you keep the point of the sword directed toward
the opening. No matter how far we stray, the beam will remain intact. That in itself will
guarantee a path, no matter how far, back to the opening."
"One last question," Ryson required. "How will we exit? I can probably make it back
up here, especially if Dzeb gives me a lift. I can throw down the rope to get you up, but
what about Dzeb? I'm not really sure my rope will hold his weight. And, if I go first, the
sword will go with me. What will be left to protect you from the trees?"
Lief placed a hand to his chin in obvious discomfort with the thought. He gritted his
teeth as he shook his head. The longer he stood silent, the more obvious his anger
became. "Fire upon my own foolishness!" he exclaimed with disgust to his own shortsightedness. "I did not consider our exit."
"What if we use the original entry?" Ryson proposed quickly, hoping to ease Lief's
irritation and give them an immediate alternative.
A spark of hope lit in Lief's eyes. "That might hold the answer," he allowed as he
deeply considered the potential solution. He spoke as he mulled over the change in plans.
"The sword would still have a light source once we break the seal and open the
passageway. We would be able to use the stone steps, and would have an exit as well as
an entry. It would, however, increase the distance of our travel within the tier. This
opening leads very near to the center. We would have spent little time walking through
the shadow trees. The original entrance is at the far end of this tier. We would have to
cross a longer distance to reach the sphere."
"But if it offers a way out, then it's our only choice." Ryson redirected his gaze back
down the tier toward its far end. His eyes quickly grasped the outline of the last door. It
waited near a hundred paces beyond the crumbled remains of the second sand giant, but it
waited with no other obstacles before it.
Just as he was about to step away from the hole, the cliff behemoth called for him to
stand his ground.
"We do not need to take such actions," Dzeb stated calmly. "This opening is still the
fastest path to the sphere. We will use it."
Ryson stared dumbfounded at the gentle giant. He saw no madness in Dzeb's eyes, but
could not conclude why he would make such a statement. He found his voice to pose the
question. "Didn't you hear what we were talking about? If we just jump down there, we
won't be able to get back out, at least I can't see how you would. You're not talking about
sacrificing yourself, are you?"
"Do you so easily forget my height, Ryson Acumen?" Dzeb questioned with a light
hearted laugh. "Do you think my arms so short I might not reach the ledge of this opening
with but a short leap? Do you think them so weak I would not be able to pull myself up?
No, delver, I will not need your rope. It will be a small accomplishment to make this
climb. I have made similar ascents. I live in the cliffs, remember? And if you are worried
about this floor holding my weight as I pull myself back up, I suggest you do not. This
floor is of solid dwarf construction. It has held under the duress of my leaps down, it will
hold as I pull myself back up."
The good-natured laugh brought a welcome break in the tension. Lief lost the anger in
himself as both he and Ryson stared up into the giant's beaming face. Even the dreary
darkness of the shadow trees seemed somewhat less threatening.
If ever Ryson comprehended the true blessing of having the cliff behemoth with them,
it was at this moment. He nearly laughed himself, but questioned the giant to make
certain of his claim. "You're sure you can get back up here without a rope?"
Dzeb laughed again. He took no insult in the question, but instead, saw it for what it
was, genuine concern. "I am certain. If you wish, I will demonstrate for you by leaping
back up to the delver tier now. It is probably of the same distance."
"No, no. That's alright." Ryson held up his hands with a broad smile. "I know I should
believe you. I just wanted to make sure."
"I understand, Ryson. Your concern for me, for all of us, is appreciated." The smile
remained upon Dzeb's innocuous lips for but a moment. It fled as he turned his own
attention back to the broken gorge in the floor. "I suggest we take no further time in
accomplishing our task."
"He's right," Lief accented. "If the sphere is now aware of our presence as shown by
our recent tragedy, we must not give it a chance to establish another means with which to
deal with us."
"Alright."
It was all Ryson could get from his mouth. He swallowed hard. His next step was as
obvious as the sun at noon day in a clear sky. The abstract shadows, the teeming jungle of
black branches and dark trunks now waited for his descent. He needed but take hold of
his rope, turn and glide downward, simplicity to a delver of his abilities.
Yet, descending into this abyss defied the elementary nature of the physical
requirements. It was much more like willingly entering a nightmare of colossal horror, a
nightmare that was reality and not dream. To look into this pit was to understand a child's
inexplicable fear of the dark, for this was the dark come to life. Here, shadows were more
than tricks of light. The darkness had the ability to do more than instill fear, but actually
attack, actually kill.
Ryson fought to suppress this comprehension of the shadow trees. His hand wrung the
handle of his sword with all his might as if he hoped to coax some last inspiration of
knowledge from the magical artifact. No such enlightenment manifested itself. He knew
all there was to know of the trees, of the last obstacle to the sphere of Ingar. There were
no other secrets to coax from the enchanted weapon. The simple truth was plainly clear,
the light was his grace, the shadows held his death.
Biting hard upon his lip, he grasped his rope as Dzeb took secure hold of one end. He
flung the opposite end through the aperture. There was no sense in standing about, staring
into the abyss of horrors. He nodded to Lief and took a long view of the cliff behemoth's
simple compassionate eyes for strength. Holding the sword steady, he dropped his legs
through the opening to the last tier.
Fighting to block out the images that now swarmed about him, he kept his eyes as well
as the sword's point locked upon the center of the hole which was now overhead. He
could not, however, completely ignore the sights brought to him by his own keen
peripheral vision. Branches darted out toward him, but retracted as they hit the glowing
pulse of light from his sword. As this radiance filled more and more of the last tier, the
shadow trees closest to him moved with desperation to escape the glow. Sludge covered
sticks parted like breaking waves as he lowered himself down.
He moved with less swiftness in this descent. He held to the rope as if it represented
the life-line to which Lief referred. When he came to its end, he actually tasted his own
reluctance to let go.
He kept the sword point steady upward, but for the first time, he allowed himself a
glance at the space below. He was still a full body's length from the floor, but it was now
visible. The shadow trees in his path had either moved aside or had been consumed by
those waiting clear of the light. A portion of the diamond crusted sheets which
safeguarded the floor was now visible. It glistened from the sword's radiance and the
reflected light helped to clear a path for his final leap.
Holding his breath, he released his grip on the rope. He hit the floor with balance and
precision. His knees bent to absorb the impact just as his arm held the sword true. The
intense light from his sword continued to cleanse the immediate area of shadow trees.
Free, unthreatening space formed four to five paces all about him and continued upward
right to the break in the ceiling.
Within this new formed tunnel among the breadth of the shadow trees, Ryson turned
his attention to his immediate surroundings. With a twist of his neck, he made one quick
reconnaissance. He scanned for landmarks of the tier. He attempted to gauge his position.
He searched for the sphere.
He saw nothing beyond the twisting, shifting darkness of the shadows that surrounded
him. His vision was restricted to the tightly wound area which the trees allowed. Though
the trees relinquished space in his immediate vicinity, they completely filled the rest of
the expanse. There was nothing to see but an endless wake of dark trunks and black
branches filled with thick sludge.
Constant motion and upheaval surrounded the delver. Those trees closest to him, in
the direct path of the light, struggled to pass back into the darkness of the swarm. Most
were consumed before they could make their departure. The trees that replaced them,
filled the space touched by the light, then faced the same dilemma.
Though the trees constantly attacked each other, they would not venture within the
modest area cleansed by the sword's light. Ryson could hear, and even sometimes see,
branches further back reaching toward him, but they dared not pass beyond this border.
Even with all the shifting and rustling of the closest trees, not a single one ventured close
enough to represent a true threat, thus he motioned for Lief to follow.
Lief answered the signal with a nod and scrambled down the rope furiously. A lifetime
of traveling through the trees, walking upon thin branches, clinging to meager vines,
enabled the elf for such an endeavor. He descended with his mind bent on speed and not
upon elegance. He let his weight pull him straight down, holding to the rope with just
enough tension to refrain from free falling. Like an anchor dropping from a ship, he
descended without swinging to and fro. Such a direct plunge kept him safely within the
tunnel among the trees created by Ryson's light, but it also left the elf with little control.
He reached the end of the rope a body length away from the ground, but he could not stop
his downward drive. He released his hold and landed hard upon the ground. He groaned
as a sharp pain erupted in his ankle.
Ryson, with a great surge of will, maintained the sword's direction toward the ceiling,
but pressed one hand upon Lief's back to steady the elf.
"Are you alright?!" Ryson's attention shot back and forth between the elf and the point
of his sword.
Lief grunted as he brought a hand to his injured ankle. "I landed poorly!" he growled
with obvious disgust at his own actions. His hands simultaneously caressed the throbbing
area as they tested the integrity of the bone. With a pained expression, he forced his foot
to bend in nearly every direction possible. He revealed his findings with obvious
annoyance at his own carelessness. "It is not broken, merely sprained. I'll live, though it
was pure stupidity."
"As long as you're alright."
Again, Lief grunted in disgust. "Alright? I have proven my fear of the shadow trees is
no smaller than the dwarves."
Ryson glanced about; checking the distance maintained by the massive trunks and
gnarled branches. He admonished the elf for his harsh self-criticism. "You think there's
something wrong with that? These things scare me to death."
The elf did not respond with anything more than a noncommittal shrug. He placed his
foot upon the gleaming floor and tested its ability to hold his weight. He was hobbled, but
he would be able to move.
Dzeb interrupted Lief's trials as the cliff behemoth called out the warning for his
imminent arrival into their midst.
"I am going to join you. Please do not move. I promise I will not land on you, but you
must stand where you are. The area is small for one of my size."
Ryson understood just how much of an understatement that was as the cliff behemoth
took his leap. As Dzeb plummeted through the gap, it appeared as if he would crush both
Lief and himself. Ryson's eyes grew as Dzeb's giant form filled the space overhead.
Every instinct within him cried for him to run, to move free of the falling colossus, but
the need to maintain the positioning of his sword held him in place. It was like watching a
giant boulder falling from the sky, threatening to land upon his head, yet he was forced to
remain frozen.
Miraculously, Dzeb dropped with exact precision. His form glided free of the
surrounding trees with room to spare on all sides. He landed with great force, force
enough to shake even the diamond encrusted floor and blow back the hair of Ryson and
Lief, but that was all which befell these two onlookers. Dzeb landed clear of them both,
and now all three stood upon the final tier.
"And so we are now here," Dzeb said simply. "We need but obtain the sphere and
leave. Where can we find it?"
Lief spun about with purpose, but found only confusion. "According to Mappel," he
exclaimed still peering about in every direction. "It is in the center of the tier. It is upon a
small pedestal surrounded by silver lined reflectors. The problem is I don't know where
the center is. The trees block my perspective."
"I think I know how to find it," Ryson offered. While keeping his sword to the gap in
the ceiling, he nodded to it. "The sphere created that hole as a means to send the magic
out of Sanctum. If we line that hole up with the hole above it, and finally with the tunnel
through the mountainside, we should be very near the sphere. Now, it may not be exact,
for some reason the tunnel through the wall curves, but we should be close."
"That is as good a start as any," Dzeb noted.
Ryson pointed with his free hand to his left. "Then, we have to go that way. I have to
keep my attention on the opening up there. I need you two to watch around me. Make
sure I don't bump into a pillar or something. And make sure I don't get too close to those
trees."
Without waiting for an answer, the delver began shuffling slowly off to his left. His
movements created a bizarre dance. As he moved, the shadow trees moved with him.
Those in his path scurried to be free of the light. None would stay to challenge his
progress. Those he moved away from kept pace with him, maintaining the same distance
and keeping the size of the borders constant. Thus, the tubular section of space offered up
by the shadow trees shifted with Ryson's every move.
As the clearing shifted, so did its shape. The opening overhead began to angle with the
point of Ryson's sword. The light continued to cleanse the area above them, but not all
the way to the ceiling. Reaching branches began to defy the light, stretching into the
spaces far over their heads. They did not pose a threat, for even Dzeb's lofty stature did
not pass beyond the border of safety, but they signified the limits of the sword’s power. It
could not clear a wide area, only a direct path. As they moved further from their point of
entry, the angle of this path steepened as it stretched to greater lengths, yet it remained
intact right through to the opening.
Lief and Dzeb matched Ryson step for step. The two stayed at the delver's side,
keeping clear of the sword while maintaining their distance from the surrounding horror.
They maintained constant awareness of the shadow trees and the ever shifting area of
decontaminated space. With their hands on Ryson's shoulders and back, they helped
guide the delver, though nothing but open ground arose from the parting black shadows.
All three plodded slowly. Ryson with his eyes toward the source of light, Lief upon
his injured ankle, and Dzeb with his great size, each stepped with care and concentration.
They barely blinked, and they said not a word, though silence was not their reward.
The true bane to their focus was the sounds from the very trees which encircled them.
Crunching, shuffling, even grinding; these noises erupted about them with maddening
intensity. Like a jungle with its constant barrage of tumultuous clamor, the shadow trees
exuded a resonance of their own design. Branch pushed against branch, trunk grated
against trunk. The thick sludge oozed to the floor with sickening dribbles. Each vibration,
each echo, etched itself in the ears of the three.
The delver swept the discord from his thoughts. His eyes peered through the gap in the
trees, furiously grasping the jagged opening to the upper level. He looked beyond the
rough edges of the fissure, up and out in search of the second blast hole. His keen
eyesight caught the lip of another fracture. He arched his neck to gauge its location. To
line up the two holes, he would have to take several steps backwards.
He took the first, then a second and third step. More of the second blast hole came into
his view. The cylinder shaped tunnel through the shadow trees soon formed a direct line,
which if continued, would connect the two openings. He stopped to peer even further
through the expanse, beyond both openings and toward Sanctum's wall, as far up as the
delver tier. He noted broken, scarred rock, and the very edges of the tunnel which led
through Sanctum's side to open air. Just a few more steps back and his line of sight would
pierce the center of all the openings.
He only took one small backward shuffle when the hand of the cliff behemoth held
him resolutely.
"We are here," Dzeb announced with gentle firmness.
Ryson nearly turned about with unbridled anticipation, nearly swerved from his point
of focus with both hand and eye. He wished to view the object of their quest, to see the
talisman that represented a legion of myths and legends. His desire was such that for a
brief moment he forgot his sword and its purpose. Had the grip of the cliff behemoth not
held him so staunchly, the point of his sword would have lost contact with the blast hole
above. He would have broken the beam which kept the waiting nightmares at bay,
leaving them at the mercy of the shadow trees, creations which had no mercy.
To their fortune, braced by Dzeb's powerful hands, Ryson was unable to turn. In an
instant, he realized the folly of his intentions, and the consequence of the sword
intensified in his mind. His arm stiffened as if trying to reinforce the invisible beam. His
eyes followed the length of the blade to ensure the direction of its point. With the sword's
importance reaffirmed in his consciousness, he stretched his arm out toward the light
source with the same tenacity in which he gritted his teeth. He silently thanked
everything about him for Dzeb's presence.
With renewed focus to keep the sword steady, Ryson carefully turned only his head to
gaze at the sight which spurred Dzeb's remark. His path had led them true, and the
shadow trees now parted to reveal the final resting place of Ingar's sphere. Peering over
his shoulder, his eyes fell upon the vessel which held the talisman for the passing of so
many cycles. The cleansing light had freed a section of the reflectors from the grip of the
trees. The metal sheets lined with silver which encapsulated the sphere were now visible
for all to see.
The reflectors had weathered the test of time, but not the power of the sphere's
intentions. The metal sheets showed no sign of rust, the visible silver linings remained
intact, but the enclosure had been penetrated with the same fury which bore a tunnel
through the side of Sanctum. Jagged, broken edges of thick metal testified to the power of
the blast which the sphere hurled outward to breach its tomb. Scorched, melted shards of
silver attested to the heat which accompanied the blast of force.
With this fracture in the surrounding reflectors, there was nothing to hide the pedestal
within or its mount. The sphere rested seemingly innocently upon the small stone
platform. It neither glowed nor pulsated. It simply waited upon its column of support as if
it expected the three visitors.
From his unmoving stance, Ryson sized up the talisman. He remembered its origin as
told to him by Lief, recalled that it was forged from the skins of each of the races. Its
structure, however, lacked such characteristics. To him, it appeared constructed more of
marble than of flesh. He had expected it to be brown and leathery, perhaps spotty and
rough, but it was grayish white and it appeared smooth. It was perfectly round like a
child's ball without the slightest hint of imperfection to its spherical shape. It was also
large. He wondered if his own arms had the length to wrap completely around it. He
could only wonder as to its weight. He assumed it was hollow, a shell to hold the
compacted magical energies of the past, but even from a distance it appeared solid, and
again, like a chiseled piece of pure marble.
His examination was cut short by Lief's sudden directive.
"I must ask that we move quickly." The elf coughed before he could continue. Dark
circles began to form under his eyes with bizarre suddenness. He grunted as the pain of
his ankle injury became more severe. "I am afraid. I can not remain this close to the
sphere for much longer. We must seize it and press on."
Urgency swept over the delver. He gave one quick glance at the end of his sword to
ensure its direction, and then took a more discerning look at the space within the
reflectors. The area immediately surrounding the sphere was clear of shadow trees. Ryson
could only attribute this to the sphere's great power. Its reason was not as important as its
existence, for it allowed a clear path to the sphere, if the cliff behemoth would take it.
"Dzeb?" Ryson began with respect, but not hiding his urgency. "I need you to get the
sphere. I can't ask Lief to do it. It's making him sick. I have to hold the sword. Can you
reach it?"
"I believe it is why I am here," Dzeb replied in his normal demeanor, as calm as if
standing beside a deep blue mountain lake.
He moved forward with no outward expression of fear for his own safety. He
completed the first part of his task with such ease, Ryson could only marvel at the
spectacle.
The cliff behemoth grabbed the ragged edges of the metal sheets and tore them aside.
The screeching whine of the yielding metal attested to the strength inherent in the
reflectors, but they could not withstand Dzeb's power. As if opening a door upon a hinge,
Dzeb expanded the opening, leaving him plenty of room to march through. He stepped up
to the pedestal, his movements still relaxed, his expression still without fear. Without so
much as a hint of reluctance, he reached out and plucked the sphere from its support.
Ryson did not know exactly what to expect at that moment. He was relieved to see
nothing. The sphere accepted Dzeb's hold without struggle. It left its home of countless
ages without the slightest reaction.
As Dzeb carried the sphere free from the broken casing, Lief stepped as far back from
him as the shadow trees would allow. He nearly allowed his shoulders to brush against
the closest of the branches. He could only wonder as to which death would be more
painful, being consumed by the shadow trees or the slow decay from the poison which
even now was sapping most of his strength.
"We need to move quickly," the elf urged through a wheeze. "I need to put more space
between myself and the sphere. That will not be possible while we remain in this tier."
Ryson acknowledged the request with actions. He retraced his path with greater speed
and quickly guided them to a point directly below the opening overhead. He looked to
Dzeb expectantly.
"Can you still make it with the sphere?"
Dzeb seeing the pain in the elf's face did not take the time to answer. He placed the
sphere securely under one arm, bent his legs, and leapt upward with power unmatched by
any other living creature. He sailed through the air, through the open space between the
trees. His momentum carried him nearly completely through the opening. His ascent
ceased as half his massive body was already through the aperture. With his free hand, he
grasped the ledge of the upper tier. With one mighty pull, he forced himself up the
remainder of the way.
As he disappeared out of sight, Lief sighed with relief. He took several deep breaths,
but only appeared slightly stronger. "I believe the poison has taken a great hold within
me." He revealed with sadness filling his expression as opposed to disgust or anger.
"Can you make the climb out of here?" Ryson spoke with an edge, hoping to urge the
elf onward.
"I believe so, though I don't know what good it will do."
"It will give you a chance," Ryson pressed. "Free air may help. Who knows what will
happen when the sphere is destroyed? And there are still the algors. They might help
revive you."
The elf replied with great fatigue hanging upon his every word. "Do not worry, Ryson.
I will move forward, if only to see the end of the sphere which threatens my people."
As if to punctuate his statement, Dzeb reared his colossal head into view of those
below.
"I have placed the sphere a distance away from here. I will keep it away from Lief as
long as we are within this mountain, but our exit is clear and it is time for us all to leave
Sanctum."


Lief broke through to the open air alone. He extracted himself from the fissure in
Sanctum's side to walk upon the inclined slope with labored, fatigued steps. Free of the
cavern, with no stone overhead, he turned his head first to the night sky. The storm had
ceased and any trace of clouds had all but vanished. The stars hung proudly overhead, but
they faded to the east as the sky in that direction began to glow with an orange hue. The
sun would rise soon, another day would dawn. If the poison were not cleansed from his
body, he knew it would be his last day.
He waited at the side of the breach, waited for Ryson and Dzeb. They had sent him
through the tunnel first, to keep him as far from the sphere as possible. They wished not
to confine him in the long cramped enclosure with Ingar's sphere. Not that it did much
good. What would it save him? A few extra moments of pain? The poison already
coursed fully through his body. Keeping him away from the sphere now was like keeping
the cat from the canary cage after the bird had already been eaten. He was, however, too
weak and too tired to argue.
He found the mountain air mildly invigorating. He inhaled deeply. The fresh crisp
night filled his body with a refreshing chill. He was free of the stale air of Sanctum, and
free of the shadow trees. If he could not cleanse himself of the poison, at least he could
forget the terrors within the mountain. Though darkness still clung to the land, the
twinkling stars and the eastern glow chased away his fear of the dark.
He sat heavily upon a large rock and crouched down to rub his ankle. It swelled
slightly, pulsed with slight pain, but thankfully, it was not a severe sprain. The fatigue
within him, the poison adhering to his every organ, this was the true threat to his health.
He would collapse out of weakness long before this minor injury would force him to
submit.
Within the fissure, Dzeb and Ryson began their ascent only after allowing Lief
sufficient time to exit. They stepped quickly, each with his own certainty. The delver
moved with his own inherent grace, while Dzeb stepped with the experience of living
among the cliffs of the highest mountains. Dzeb held tightly to the sphere as Ryson lifted
his sword to light their final passage.
As the trail curved, the last leg of the tunnel came into their sights. With the breach's
opening to the outside clearly in view, Ryson recalled his very first experience in this
cavern. With powerful recollection, he gauged the exact space where the invisible barrier
blocked his passage. As they closed upon it, he considered calling for a halt, but he did
not. With his delver ear, he could hear Lief's labored breathing outside the tunnel. He had
made it through. He also noted the scratch marks upon the ground of the algors’ claws, as
well as the lesser tracks of Jon, Stephen, Lauren and Holli. They led unimpeded through
the tunnel as well. The invisible barrier that had prevented his earlier entry had not
prohibited their exit. It stood that he and Dzeb should be equally successful.
Still, he took a small lead upon the cliff behemoth to be the first through the barrier.
He stiffened as he took the step which would carry him through the point where he knew
it existed. As he surmised, he passed without restriction. The only true question
remaining involved the effect of the sphere's passing of the force field. With that question
feeding his curiosity, Ryson turned to witness Dzeb's crossing.
The cliff behemoth was also not stopped, but his passing of the barrier was not
without incident. Ryson's assessment of the barrier's location had been precise. It
reaffirmed its existence for but a slight moment as Dzeb carried the sphere through. No
longer needed to protect the path to the orb, the field crackled with a bluish purple
charge. It then fizzled away, leaving only a reminiscent scent which Ryson found similar
to that of striking lightning.
Ryson threw out his hand to test the space. It passed through without hindrance, the
barrier had dissolved. The tunnel now formed an unimpeded path both to and from the
mountain's core. The way to the sphere's long guarded resting place was now clear, but
no longer important. With but a few more steps of the cliff behemoth, Ingar's sphere
would be free of Sanctum all together.
Ryson turned and stepped lively over the last few paces. He sensed the magnitude of
their deed as he moved out of the tunnel. His thoughts turned on the legends, on the
mystique of Sanctum and all it represented. Now, with a cliff behemoth at his side, he
would see the culmination of a quest which matched the most extravagant of these myths.
Sanctum had been entered, the obstacles overcome, and the sphere removed from the
most guarded of places.
Yet, there was more, more than simply overcoming the five tiers. They had passed
through deeper, stronger barriers, barriers borne of fear, doubt, even intolerance. They
had not simply defeated Sanctum; they had overcome the mistrust of ages. The sphere's
existence outside of this monument was testament to that. Such a feat would never have
been completed without the assistance of all the races; the elves, algors, humans, and
even the dwarves. They would not have succeeded without the Sword of Decree or
without Mappel's knowledge of the shadow trees. They would not have survived the
human tier without Lauren's protection. And this moment certainly would not have been
possible without the contribution of the dwarves. Tun might have held to his doubts but
he led them safely through the first tier, paved the way to ultimate success. Now, a cliff
behemoth and a delver saw to the last act of removal.
In that moment of acknowledging the importance of their accomplishment, full
comprehension followed. The thought of Tun dampened Ryson's exhilaration. There was
a cost to be born for their success and even as Dzeb brought the talisman fully free from
Sanctum, the delver began to feel as much sadness as joy.
The remainder of his delight was shattered by the cough of his elf friend. The deep
hack spurred the delver's attention away from the sphere, and as he looked upon Lief
again, he wondered if they had finished paying the toll.
Lief was becoming a hollow shell of the elf he met not so long ago. The dark circles
around his eyes were forming heavy bags, while the rest of his face seemed to thin with
every blink of the eye. Even as he sat upon a large stone, his legs trembled and Ryson
knew it was not from the pain of the ankle sprain. The elf was gaunt now to the point
much beyond the lean Mappel, so much more than when he had first entered Sanctum.
The long bow across his shoulder seemed more of a heavy burden than that of a weapon
which Lief might use with any conviction. Ryson wondered if Lief could even pull back
upon the taught string, a conjecture which was augmented as the elf struggled weakly to
his feet.
Ryson, filled with compassion for Lief's haggard state, called for the elf to cease his
struggle. "Don't get up. You need the rest."
Lief ignored the request with his last ounce of stubbornness. "I will not rest until the
sphere is destroyed. To see to that, we must reach the peak."
"Maybe you should stay here. Let Dzeb and I go up ahead. There's no need for you to
remain close to the sphere."
"The sphere has already done its damage to me," Lief admitted with a heavy breath.
"Remaining with you during this short climb will not make a difference."
"Are you sure?" Ryson was more than slightly reluctant to let the elf accompany them.
He honestly thought the climb might take the rest of Lief's strength.
"I am sure," Lief grunted with one final burst of resolve. "I am weakened, but not
over. I will see this to its end. Besides, if the poison can be washed from me, I will need
the healing power of the algors."
Ryson started to offer the alternative of letting the algors come to the elf. Lief,
however, ignored the proposal.
"Let us just hurry to the top," Lief requested with a weary voice. "The sooner it is
destroyed, the better my chances of survival. Let me get on ahead of you. I need but a
small distance from the sphere. After that, it makes no difference whether I stand a league
or a hair from it. The poison remains in the air regardless."
With a surprising burst of strength, Lief darted forward and up Sanctum's slope.
Ryson watched with dismay as he knew this was the last ounce of power the elf would
muster. He gave Lief ample time before nodding to Dzeb for them to follow.
Ryson kept a pace which allowed Lief to maintain his distance. Only when the elf
disappeared over the final ledge did Ryson increase his speed to utilize his own climbing
abilities, as well as those of Dzeb. The last few paces were covered with the speed of a
near sprint and the accompanying light which surrounded them announced their arrival.
The radiance from his sword, increasing with the extending glow to the east, matched
clear daylight upon the top of the mountain. It chased away the darkness as the weapon in
his hand appeared more like a flaming torch than a finely polished sword. It brought light
to all those who now stood upon Sanctum's peak and it revealed for all to see that the
sphere was in Dzeb's hands.
Most stared at the sphere in wonder, save Holli who was tending to Lief. He had
crumpled to the ground in final exhaustion.
Matthew broke the silence with a near shout of exhilaration. "Bless you, bless you
both delver and cliff behemoth! And bless the powers that guided us!"
His outburst was cut short by the angry ranting of Jon who stood over the still form of
his brother. "Let us waste no more time! Give the sphere to the spirit, let her open the
sphere and use the power to save my brother!"
"Then there is hope?" Ryson turned a heartened glance toward Mappel.
"Shayed has stated she might be able to revive the dwarf once the magic is free,"
Mappel replied. To this point, he remained guarded, but he could not completely restrain
his growing enthusiasm. "With the sphere free of Sanctum, I now believe anything is
possible."
"Life and death is the province of Godson," Dzeb remarked unshakably. His
expression revealed his doubts over the matter and he made no move forward as he
maintained possession of the sphere.
While Dzeb's statement stirred reflection within the elder elf, it infuriated the younger
dwarf. Jon, agitated and disturbed by Dzeb's lack of movement, darted ferociously to the
cliff behemoth. He leapt in the air as he plucked it from Dzeb's hands. The dwarf
struggled awkwardly with the sphere's size, but not with his intentions. He bore a direct
path to the ghostly form of Shayed.
As the apparition threw open its hands in gleeful anticipation, Ryson was nearly
knocked from his feet by the staggering revelation which presented itself. The power of
the sword surged through him. The very air seemed to unravel. He could not focus upon
another, not even Mappel who stood by him. His attention was thrust toward the spirit
that took Shayed's shape. The ghostly form turned blood red, at first with no
characteristics, but soon its shape came true to him. The shaven head, wicked eyes,
gnarled hands, all contrasted sharply with the soft benevolent image of Shayed. He saw
clearly through the disguise and beheld the hungry visage of a maddened wizard.
"No!" Ryson screamed. The single word echoed over and over in his mind. Despair
and fear ran through him like a cold river. He watched helplessly, painfully, as Jon's
movements seemed to slow to a snail's pace, but did not falter. The dwarf never hesitated,
never heeded the delver's anguished cry.
Ryson erupted in fury as he witnessed the dwarf holding out the sphere to Ingar's
greedily curling hands. The delver bolted forward, but even his tremendous speed could
not erase the distance in time. He dove the last few paces, stretched out to grab the
dwarf's waist, but before impact, the sphere had been passed.
Jon was solid, sturdy with a low center of gravity, but Ryson's momentum sent him
flying. The two rolled over on the wet ground of Sanctum's peak, Jon with angry
confusion, Ryson with growing alarm. The delver gracefully completed the roll and let
the spinning motion carry him back to his feet. Jon remained in a bewildered heap, but
bore a furious stare upon Ryson.
"Are you mad?!" the dwarf roared. "Do you not want to see my brother restored to
me?"
Ryson could not answer, did not have to. The maniacal laugh of another offered a
much clearer answer. Jon saw the shocked, near incoherent stare of the delver as the first
clue to the scene behind his back. He turned only to witness the others staring in much
the same fashion. All watched blankly at the terrifying spectacle. With a final twist of his
neck, Jon finally placed his sights upon the source of the depraved exuberance and knew
there was no hope for his brother, perhaps no hope for any of them.
Ingar's disguise had vanished, no longer needed as he possessed the talisman of his
own creation, the sphere of ultimate power. He stood revealed; the feigned whiteness of
his spirit dissolved and was now stained by his true blood red appearance. The soft kind
features of his previous mask eroded away into the deranged face of a madman. His bald
head glowed hot. He laughed deeper with delight in his own malice as he now soaked in
the power to carry out his twisted nightmares.
The sphere remained beside him, a willing accomplice or perhaps dictator of these
same horrific desires. He did not hold the weight of the orb. Instead, he let it levitate
within his reach. While his hands remained free, a bond much like a crimson rope tied the
two together. A magical union between the sphere and the baneful spirit opened the vast
power to Ingar, allowed him to carry out his desires, desires which were indeed spurred
by the sphere.
If there was ever a question as to which was truly in control, whether wizard or
talisman, it no longer mattered. The two were now one, linked by the bond. The sphere
proved as the source of unimaginable power, the wizard was the tool.
As if to punctuate this undeniable fact, Ingar raised his hands and unleashed the power
which was now his to control. With focus on his perceived greatest threat, chains of
energy five times the length and width of those he used to capture Shayed materialized.
They knifed through the air with frightening speed and accuracy. They crashed upon
Dzeb with an eruption of power. An explosion shook the ground, knocked many to their
knees, including the cliff behemoth. The chains entwined themselves around the giant,
holding him to his knees as they bound his arms and legs and anchored him to the
ground.
Ingar found such delight in his achievement, at watching Dzeb kneel before him, he
grinned with boastful taunts. "I might not have been able to hold you before, cliff
behemoth, but now I possess nearly all the magic in the land. Your strength is now
meaningless to me. You speak of Godson's great power. There is no power greater than
mine. That is why you kneel before me."
Dzeb's gentle nature washed from him with these words. His expression turned
hateful, and the calm blue of his eyes dissolved into cold hostility. He roared, and his
scream filled the air like a clap of thunder, and again, the ground shook. He pulled with
all his might, but he could not break the chains.
His display merely brought more laughter from the wizard, and another wave of a
crimson hand. The chains obeyed the command and lengthened as they wrapped about
Dzeb's mouth.
"We'll have no more shouts from you," Ingar said through a malicious giggle.
"What is the meaning of this?!" Mappel was the first to respond to the confusion. He
broke his sight from the captured cliff behemoth and turned it upon the depraved spirit.
Ingar turned a spiteful glance to the elder elf. "Do you not recognize me? You, oh
great and wise elf. You who are so arrogant that you believe you can explain things
beyond your knowledge. If you are so wise in the way of the legends, how is it you were
unable to tell the difference between a weak sorceress and the mighty Ingar?"
Mappel blinked as he repeated the name in a whisper. He could not be certain of this,
he had never witnessed Ingar and there were only meager descriptions. He could only
speculate. What was before him appeared as a spirit mad with power. There was little
else in the way of an explanation, yet it was not possible.
Ingar found only more joy in Mappel's reaction. He sought to add to the elf's despair.
"You have doubts, but you had no doubts as to Shayed's return. You believed her capable
of returning, why not Ingar? Do you truly think her superior to me? You have spoke so
highly of Shayed, climbed all the way up to meet her as if she was some goddess. She is
nothing."
Another wave of a hand and Shayed now stood revealed. Ingar removed the power
that blocked her from the sight of the others but did not remove the bonds that held her.
She floated helplessly, unable to lift her arms, unable to escape from the scarlet prison
which surrounded her.
"Look upon the sorceress you believed so powerful. She was nothing to me before.
She is even less than that now. Let your doubts fade, pathetic creature. I am Ingar, and I
have returned to claim what is rightfully mine."
Nearly every set of eyes fell upon the captured spirit of Shayed. Only Holli ignored
the spectacle. The elf guard's mind raced with devising alternatives of attack. She found
little hope to cling to. She had no experience in dealing with magical foes, and no idea of
how to attack the ghost of an insane wizard. She immediately discounted all standard
forms of defense. He was not of material form and her arrows would pass through him.
Only one plausible course of action came to mind. If she could not attack the wizard
directly, perhaps she could distract him.
She crouched low and moved with stealth and silence to the ledge of the platform
behind her. Sinking low to the ground, she kicked at a pile of loose rocks. The debris
scattered and tumbled over the ledge. As the tumbling rocks fell upon other loose dirt, the
small commotion soon turned into a minor avalanche. With the resounding crash of rocks
calling for attention, she leapt behind another set of boulders behind Ingar and away from
everyone else.
The avalanche failed to achieve its desired effect. While it called for attention, added
to the disorientation of the passing events, it did not faze the wizard. Ingar scoffed as he
addressed the rocks where Holli hid.
"Do you truly believe I do not sense your useless attempts, elf?" Ingar bore a harsh
glance towards Holli as he ignored the rumbling of falling rocks. "If you believe such
mundane tricks are of any value, then you must be taught a lesson."
Again, Holli considered the situation. Her foe was aware of her tactics and sounded
ready to strike. She stepped confidently out from behind the rock and faced Ingar
defiantly. If she must die to give the rest a chance, so be it. It was simply what she was
trained for. Her bravery, however, was lost upon the magic caster.
"You insult me," Ingar snarled. "You are an insignificant ant. Destroying you is a
waste of even the most miniscule portion of my power, but I do wish to hurt you." He
paused, and a devious grin curled upon his transparent lips. "I know you, elf, I know what
it is that drives you. Your own death would mean nothing to you, but what of the death of
another, the death of one you are supposed to protect."
He kept his blood red eyes fixed upon the elf guard, but his hand waved toward
Mappel. This time there was no bolt of power, no explosion or clap of thunder, no fanfare
at all for the deed which would eradicate Mappel. The elder elf simply disintegrated into
gray dust.
For Holli, for Ryson, for them all; the very air seemed to quiver. Reality unraveled,
scattered through the air like pollen on a windy day. No one could speak, no one could
cry. Denial ruled. What they saw was not possible. Mappel was gone, destroyed with the
mere wave of one hand. As the elder elf formed the anchor which held them together,
those that remained upon Sanctum, aghast and dispirited, were now all cut loose to the
wild insanity they faced. Vacant stares filled their faces. Their trials, their successes, their
promises to each other; everything fell into the dust of Mappel's remains.
Ingar spoke slowly, viciously adding to their disorientation. His words hummed with
mesmerizing effect, eating at their very wills. He spoke directly at Holli, but his voice
tore at them all. "He is dead. I have taken everything he was from you. And you, you that
were supposed to protect him could do nothing to stop me. I could do the same to your
brother elf that lies upon the ground, but I will let the poison in his veins kill him slowly.
I will let you watch. Besides, there are others here you have vowed to protect."
A shout filled with vengeance finally erupted in the air. It broke the stunned stupor
bought upon by Mappel's end. The words held strength as well as anger, but they came
not from the elf guard.
"Coward! Pathetic coward! Craven, misguided bully. What have you proved, that you
can catch goldfish trapped in a small bowl?"
"Eh?" Ingar turned to the source of the insults. His eyes filled with interest as he
beheld the staunch expression of Lauren. "Might this be a true challenge?"
"I challenge nothing but your arrogance. Any cat can catch a mouse, that is all you
prove on this day."
"And what of you? Are you also a cat, sorceress?"
"I claim nothing other than your cowardice."
"Then I shall prove my power against you." With more of a dramatic flair, Ingar threw
his arms out and up over his head. A ring of red power encircled his hands. It swirled
swiftly, tumultuously, in the shape of a perfect circle. His eyes widened with insane
exultation. He opened his mouth wide to laugh with the intoxication of power. In a fit of
glee, he clamped his hands together and pressed his arms outwards toward the human
sorceress.
The fiery ring flew through the air. It continued to spin as it jettisoned itself free of
Ingar. It sped with deadly intentions towards its predefined victim.
In a surge of defiance, Lauren welcomed the controlled surge of magical energy. She
raised her own hands, her palms pressed outward and like magnets they drew in the
glowing red fire. She absorbed every ounce. Her fingers crackled with the power which
changed from red to orange, then to blue and finally to deep purple. She refocused the
force. It soon encompassed her own hands. For her, though, it formed the four points of a
diamond. As Ingar had cast it at her, she hurled it back at him.
The diamond maintained its shape. It sliced forward with one point fixed upon Ingar's
chest. It impacted before he could block and opened a rent within the apparition's center.
A clear undiluted hole shone free within Ingar's midst. He winced with pain and then
roared with anger.
"So be it!" he snarled, seemingly accepting Lauren's newfound abilities. With his palm
atop the sphere, he pointed two fingers at Lauren. Lost was his desire to destroy her with
flare. He only wished to remove her presence, to eradicate her as he dismissed the elder
elf. He became a simple conduit, nothing more than directional device to siphon the
power from the talisman and focus it upon a single target.
A narrow beam of bright force split the night, gleamed nearly as bright as Ryson's
sword. Lauren attempted again to collect and refocus the power, but the beam defied
capture. It passed through her palms as if they were not there. It found its mark at the
middle of her forehead, and she collapsed with a groan.
Even as she hit the hard rock ground, Ingar maintained the presence of the beam. It
slowly drove her beyond unconsciousness and closer to coma.
The sight was more than painful to watch. Each and every individual that remained
upon Sanctum broke from their own hypnotic trance, shunned the shock which held them
in place for so long. Holli fired an arrow, not at Ingar but at the sphere, an object which
was solid and perhaps vulnerable to such an attack. The two algors followed suit, piercing
the air with hard stones from their slings. Jon freed the mace from his belt and attempted
a direct assault.
These attempts failed, however, as Ingar's free hand threw a wave of force that
dropped them and their projectiles to the ground. Not an arrow, not a stone, and not Jon's
mace ever got close to the orb.
Only one tactic met with success. Ryson had not attempted an assault, but had moved
between Ingar and Lauren. With delver precision, he held the blade of his sword forward
to block the deadly beam.
To Ingar's dismay and anger, the Sword of Decree absorbed the beam, halted its path
as easily as a man's hand would hold a feather. The wizard moved his arm hoping to
reestablish the attack upon the sorceress, but Ryson's speed proved too much for him.
Each time Ingar would redirect his finger, Ryson's sword would counter easily.
Ingar's expression turned more and more violent. He bared his red teeth like a mad
wolf. He flung his arm wildly in frustration. His own anger began to consume him, and
he turned his aggression toward the delver. He no longer focused upon Lauren, but
attempted to fix the beam at Ryson's heart.
It would not matter. Ryson's hand remained too quick, matching Ingar move for move.
The sword stalemated the beam, and it fed Ingar's frustration.
The wizard's own grip on his distorted plans began to unravel. The desire to kill the
delver seized his every thought. The pulsating hunger to watch his ray of power burn
Ryson's heart became an obsession. Such was the intensity of his wish, he would have
ignored almost anything at that moment, but even this burning craving could not blind
him to the awe-inspiring sight to come.
They came without sound. Only the blazing glow of their very existence announced
their presence. Dzeb saw them first, then Stephen, and Matthew soon after. High
overhead, lights sailed flawlessly through the remnants of the night. Like stars dropping
from the sky, they plunged downward to Sanctum's peak. Ten in number, matching the
number that entered the citadel to retrieve the sphere, they set upon the level platform of
the summit. They spread themselves in a large circle with Ingar at the center. They lacked
any true definition, any true form or characteristic. Unlike Shayed, and even Ingar, whose
spirit forms simulated their previous mortal appearance, these apparitions remained
anonymous. They appeared only as glowing oblong shapes, but to Dzeb their identity was
no mystery, and their appearance gave him the strength to bite through the mystic chain
which held his mouth closed.
"Angels!" he murmured with emotion cracking his soft voice.
"Angels of Godson!" Stephen and Matthew repeated.
The spirits made no move, but their appearance broke Ingar's single-minded attack
upon Ryson. The wizard removed his hand from the sphere, and the beam ceased.
Only at that moment did Ryson allow himself the opportunity to gaze at the
surrounding spirits. He kept his sword at the ready, in case Ingar renewed his attack, but
Ingar now became preoccupied with what he viewed as an invading force.
The wizard turned his seething frustration upon the spirits. "What are you doing here?
You have no business here!"
As Ingar raved and threatened, Stephen quietly moved to Ryson's side. He moved with
calm steps as if guided by the will of some great power. His eyes glistened with joyful
tears. He could not hold back a wide smile. An expression of pure enlightenment filled
not only his face, but his entire being. His words were strong and true, but they held the
captivation of an emotional plea.
"This was never beyond Godson's will," he said to Ryson with such conviction the
delver nearly dropped his guard. "What was to happen here was never meant to be
prophesied, was never meant to be understood by elf or human, or anyone else. That is
why it was not in the Book of Godson, why it was not a part of elflore. And that is why I
saw two visions. This moment was for you and you alone."
"What are you trying to tell me?" Ryson questioned trying to look beyond Stephen's
enlightened expression and attempting to understand his words.
Stephen spoke quicker as if time had become a crucial factor. "The will of Godson is
paved first by the actions of great individuals. That is what waits for you now. The choice
is yours to make. The power rests within you to stop Ingar, but the responsibility does not
rest solely upon your shoulders. The angels are here to save the land regardless of your
decision. You have been the centerpiece through this all, the channel through which
Godson has painted his will, but what you do now is within your own hands."
Suddenly, violently, Ingar turned back upon Ryson as if he had heard the words of the
interpreter. He disregarded the shapeless spirits and turned his anger into a crimson ball
of fire. He hurled it, not at Ryson, but at Stephen Clarin.
The delver leapt forward, his sword ready to absorb the screaming attack. It cleaved
the clump of power in half, but did not stop it. The two halves of red flame sailed
harmlessly past Ryson. It reformed to single ball and found its mark at Stephen's chest.
The interpreter collapsed to the ground upon impact. He neither screamed nor cried.
His shirt seared away, his chest boiled with severe burns as scarlet smoke drifted up from
the smoldering wound.
Ryson twisted as he regrouped. He had seen the impact, and now smelled the
nauseating scent of burning flesh. He did not know how much life could remain within
the interpreter, if any. He could only guess as to the staggering pain if Stephen remained
at all conscious. He dove to his side only to find him still smiling.
Stephen's eyes reflected an absence of pain. His entire face retained the bliss of the
moment before the attack.
"Do not blame yourself," Stephen coughed a reply, his face still strangely glowing
with peace and fulfillment. "This was meant to be. My responsibilities here, in every
way, are finished. I shall leave with them." He gave a fading glance toward the closest
angel before he died.
Ryson grimaced with sorrow. First Mappel, and now Stephen, both gone. The pain
tore at him, pulled from him the awareness of where he was, what he was doing. He
ground his teeth together. He could not scream, though he wanted to.
"Remember his words. Honor your memory of him and remember his words." Though
Dzeb remained chained and the sphere still within Ingar's possession, he spoke as if the
land had already been saved, the threat removed. His soft, serene voice cut through
Ryson's pain, brought him back to the here and now.
Ryson rose slowly. He stood looking down at the interpreter, not caring for whom or
what surrounded him. He broke his stare upon Stephen to glance over at the remains of
Mappel. He cast sights upon Tun's corpse and Lief's fallen form. His eyes then glanced
down the still glowing blade of his sword, and finally at Ingar.
The wizard matched his stare with a sneer. Ingar would not completely forget the
angels, he stole a glance at them at quick intervals, but Ryson remained the true point of
his attention. He did not raise an immediate hand to smite the delver. Instead, he waited,
watching Ryson's every move, and edging ever closer to the sphere as if grasping for the
security of its power.
Ryson's grip on the sword tightened. He opened himself, not to the weapon, but to the
power which used it as a conduit for knowledge. He waited silently, patiently, but most of
all unwaveringly. He opened himself up to true faith.
The necessary course of action implanted itself in his thoughts with razor sharp
clarity. He now had the power, the knowledge and the will to defeat Ingar and his
talisman. He stepped toward the glaring wizard as if he represented no more threat than a
yearling rabbit.
Insanity gave way to fear in Ingar's eyes, fear that drove him to strike. Both hands
formed tight fists and he struck them together. A burst of red flame speared out toward
Ryson. Crimson flames licked the air, so hot they singed patches of sparse wild grass
growing within the rock, but they would not so much as warm a single hair on the
delver's head.
Ryson saw the absolute truth of what he faced. He was not fighting magic, he was
fighting Ingar. A spirit, yes, but still the culmination of consciousness, experiences, and
emotions of a once mortal human wizard. Even as a ghost, Ingar was limited by his own
unique character, by his judgments and the encounters which shaped that character. His
own insanity born by his thirst for power blinded him as a mortal and it bound him as a
spirit. Even with a near limitless source of power at his command, Ingar could not break
the bonds which shaped his own sense of reality. That reality dictated he would attack not
as a spirit, but as the mortal human wizard he once was, and no match for the speed and
agility of a purebred delver.
Ryson had leapt clear of the flames, expending little effort or energy. He jumped
forward, closer to Ingar, and he watched the wizard's fear grow. He planted his feet
firmly upon solid ground and bent his knees for balance. He stood prepared for the next
attack which came quickly.
Ingar threw his arms apart, fingers extended. A surge of force exploded from his
outstretched hands. Unlike his previous assaults which were limited in scope, this burst of
power covered a wide breadth of space. The wizard flung it all around him, in every
direction, leaving nowhere to run or hide.
The crackling wave of energy formed a ring which stretched outward. It expanded as
it rolled away. As Holli, Jon, and the algors were still struggling to their feet from a
previous attack, it bowled them over, sent them rolling to the edges of Sanctum's flat
peak.
As the energy wave bore down upon the surrounding angels, they floated motionlessly
in their circle about the wizard. Their faceless forms could give no indication of emotion,
but their lack of movement served to reveal their disregard for the assault. It passed
harmlessly through them, but they were not its target. The main thrust of its force was
directed at the delver, but he defied it as well.
He held the flat of his blade before him, held it vertically in front of his chest and face.
He stood perfectly balanced upon the balls of his feet, stood with absolute certainty in his
actions.
The ripple of energy hit his sword first. The blade sucked power like a hungry calf.
The wave weakened dramatically, diminishing instantly to the strength of a strong wind.
Ryson leaned into it as it struck his person. The gust threw dust and debris into the air, it
held nearly all his weight as he leaned forward. It ruffled his hair and his clothes, but did
little else.
Ryson said nothing. He showed little delight or enthusiasm in overcoming Ingar's
assault. He eyed the wizard carefully, attempting to predict the next attack.
Uncertainty fed Ingar's fears. He brought incorporeal hands to his ghostly forehead as
if to massage temples which truly did not exist. In a fit of fear born despair, he thrust both
arms about the sphere. While his immaterial hands could have passed through pure
granite, they seemed to take hold of the talisman which radiated with energy. His red
form pulsated with power, beating fitfully like the heart of a running horse. The red hue
of his spirit deepened to a point he appeared almost solid. A cry of rage spurred by the
hope of victory erupted from his core.
His arms remained about the sphere as he called his own final order. "Drop your
weapon, delver! Drop it or I shall destroy this mountain top. I will send everyone about
us tumbling down its broken slopes in an avalanche of rock and dirt. Drop it now!"
The delver released his hold on the sword with a blur of motion. His arm had cocked
back and flew forward before Ingar finished his last word. The sword point sliced
through the air, the weapon becoming a flying spear. Such was the speed with which
Ryson made his throw, the glowing blade formed a streak like lightning from his hand to
the center of the sphere. It skewered the talisman, the sharp point slicing through one side
and crashing through the other.
The sphere split open like a cracked egg, falling apart in Ingar's very arms. A surge of
power, composed of every color, exploded into the air, an eruption which matched a
hundred volcanoes. The once captured magic rose high in the sky, only to spread out,
scattered in every direction as if blown by winds from all points of the compass.
If the wizard made one final cry, it was not heard. He was caught in the surge and
could not pull free from the current. The waves of released energy pulled him apart,
washed his remnants away. It erased every spiritual fiber of the wizard Ingar.
With Ingar destroyed, the chains that held both Shayed and Dzeb disappeared. The
cliff behemoth struggled to his feet as the elf spirit looked to the quickly dispersing cloud
of colorful energy.
The land was being reborn before their very eyes. Changes erupted in a heartbeat as
magic buried for countless seasons spread with fury. Changes, both good and evil, both
dark and light, encompassed the sky and the ground. Subtle alterations which would not
be noticed in the life of an elf took root in the hills and in the flatlands. Obvious
transformations, more striking than the sight of a cliff behemoth, took hold in the far
corners of the deserts and the seas. What could not have been possible was now likely.
The normal lives of every creature in Uton were now irrevocably altered.
"The magic is free," Shayed stated just above a whisper. "Free and pure. The taint of
poison has been removed." There was no emptiness for the sorceress in this moment, and
there would be none to follow. Only now, at the sphere's final destruction, did she realize
that Ingar's talisman was not a source of purpose for her consciousness, but a shackle. It
was not the sphere that etched her place in the legends, but her own deeds. In this
revelation, she found everlasting fulfillment. With these words, she faded from sight.
As if her departure signaled the end of their own mysterious mission, the ten shapeless
spirits which had encircled Ingar took flight. Each circled the mountain top once before
taking leave to the heavens.
Dzeb watched their exit serenely.
Ryson followed suit. He sheathed his sword to let their light glisten more proudly in
the fading dark. He silently counted the gleaming lights as they disappeared. Though,
only ten had taken flight from Sanctum's peak, eleven had circled overhead. He bowed
his head to the last as it followed the others to the heavens.
In but scant moments, the glow from the east soon expanded. The light of day
encompassed everything. The rainbow of magical energy dispersed completely as the
stars were blocked from sight and the sky turned a deep blue. Ryson turned to the east,
turned to welcome the sun as it rose above the horizon.


"She faded away just before the other spirits took off." Ryson made his explanation to
Lief as the elf sat up on the drying ground in the sunlight. The algors sat beside him,
using their healing powers to chase away the exhaustion, to repair his injured ankle. Holli
stood watch over them all, never convinced that the danger had simply ceased to exist.
Her eyes darted about the summit as well as down the slopes while the delver continued
his retelling of Shayed's departure.
Ryson was torn with emotions and his words betrayed the swirling confusion within
him. There was joy, as much as he tried to deny it. There was also much pain. Ingar had
been vanquished, the sphere destroyed, but the death of two more brought guilt to any
sense of triumph. He found it difficult to retell the story to Lief, could not look in his eyes
when he spoke of Mappel's death, but the elf had urged him to continue. He could do so
only with hollow words, proclaiming victory as if it were equal to defeat. He now spoke
of Shayed's last words with but a hint of comfort.
"She said the magic was pure and the taint of poison gone. I can sense she's right.
Something about the air feels different. Not the way it was before the quake, but less
threatening."
"The taint of poison has been removed, do not doubt that." Lief stretched to test his
rejuvenated muscles and to illustrate his returning strength. "I would not have lasted this
day if it had remained, but the poison is gone from my body as well." The elf paused,
scanned the mountain top as if to confirm an assumption. "What about Dzeb?"
Ryson shrugged, indicating he understood so little about the cliff behemoth. His tone
carried the same uncertainty. "He left just as the sun rose, started climbing down the
mountain like nothing ever happened. He told me to say good-bye to everyone for him.
That was it. I don't..."
Dust kicked up from Lauren's heels choked off his words. She looked upon the delver
blankly, ignoring the elves and the algors.
The delver noticed many things in that moment. Her nervous actions disappeared as
her arms hung steadily at her sides. Her eyes, though void of emotion, could focus
without distraction upon her objective. The confusion, the denial of what she had
become, had washed away. There remained hundreds of decisions to make, decisions
only a magic caster faced and foreign to a delver, but the acceptance of her own abilities
now seemed anchored in this changing reality.
When she spoke, any uncertainty focused not upon what she was, but where it would
lead her. Her words carried conviction, if not true direction.
"You were wrong, Ryson Acumen," she began bluntly but without anger. "I did make
my decision within Sanctum. I can no longer turn back. I am a magic caster, a sorceress. I
don't know where that will lead me, but I know you had a hand in my decision. I am also
aware you saved me from Ingar. I hope you understand it is difficult to be grateful when
you can't be sure if living will be a blessing or a curse. I can only guess that someday I
will know that answer. If we meet again, I will either thank you or kill you."
She read his mind before he could respond. "The reason for your actions doesn't
matter. I know you didn't mean to curse me, if that is what you've done. Again, it doesn't matter. Do you really think I will care about your intentions if the magic corrupts me? I
only give this to you as a warning. I now take the name of Tabris. If in the future that
name becomes infamous, I suggest you sleep lightly. Do not bother to escort me down
the mountain. I will find my own way."
She turned about, leaving him with the same blank face. Ryson could only stare into
her back as she slowly walked off to a path down Sanctum's slope. He put a hand to his
head and rubbed his eyes. As his fingers rode up his forehead and brushed his hair back,
he looked toward Lief with his own growing fatigue.
"Do not fret," Lief said almost cheerily. "She has a long path to travel. Even the
greatest wizards do not become powerful within a few seasons. She has much to learn,
and without other magic casters to teach her, she will indeed have to find her own way. It
will be a very long time before she becomes a true threat, and she may never become a
threat at all. She may use her powers for the service of the land. If not, she might cause
her own undoing while researching a spell. It is not that I wish that, it is only that we can
not say what direction she will take. It is not worth your worry."
"Easy to say," Ryson sighed. "With all that's happened I don't need something else to
worry about." He looked down at the ground and kicked at the dusty rock with the toe of
his boot. "You have to remember, this is not going to be an easy time for me as it is. The
magic is going to turn Uton upside down. The people I know, the place I call home,
neither are going to adjust well to what's going to happen now. I really don't need to hear
her tell me that someday she might want to kill me."
"You speak as if the magic will bring nothing but harm to the land. That is not the
case." Lief spoke with more authority now. The algors had completed their work and now
stepped aside to let the elf stand. "Look at me. I was near dead, the algors have used the
magic to heal me."
"It was the magic that almost killed you," Ryson reminded.
"True, but it was not the magic which injured my ankle, yet that is healed as well."
"What about Tun, and Stephen?" Ryson looked over toward the two fallen forms
where Matthew and Jon prepared them for burial. He then looked to the clump of ash
which was all that remained of Mappel. He spoke of the elder elf in a pained whisper.
"What about Mappel?"
The cheer left Lief's lips, but not his resolve. "Mappel died to save the elves, to save
the land of Uton. He will be missed, but his memory will not be lost on useless sorrow. I
can not change the things that have happened here. I do not wish to. The sphere is
destroyed. The threat to us all is ended. Mappel is now as much a part of the legends as
Shayed herself. I can not, will not deny him that."
"I wish I could see it that easily," Ryson confessed. "But right now, I see friends that
have died and a great deal of uncertainty."
It was Holli who seized upon this statement. "Uncertainty leads to questions, and
questions need answers. Is that not what a delver lives for?"
Lief nodded. "Those are words you should cling to. True enough, the land is changing.
You will live a life to see things you might never have dreamed of. What you have grown
to expect is vanishing even faster than before. Pure magic is a powerful thing. It can be
used in so many ways. No one truly knows what the magic will bring, but I would think it
is a wonderful time to be a delver."
Ryson was not given a chance to respond as Lief turned his attention to the
approaching Jon and Matthew.
The reader spoke in quiet somber tones. "Jon and I have decided to let Sanctum serve
as the final resting place for Stephen and Tun. We will carry them inside through the
breach and into the delver tier. Jon has told me there is no danger for us there. Upon our
exit, Jon will see to the destruction of the tiers, collapsing the entire internal structure. He
will then seal all points of entry. Sanctum will no longer hold secrets of danger, but serve
as a monument for those who gave their lives to overcome it. We hope that you will
consider joining us and allowing it to be Mappel's monument as well."
Lief turned to Holli who nodded her head. He bowed his own head in deep
consideration before giving his answer. "It seems only fitting. Let human, dwarf, and elf
rest together in a place which once symbolized their mistrust for one another."
Saying nothing else, Lief walked somberly to Mappel's remains. He emptied his
arrows to the ground and used his quiver as an urn for the ashes.
Matthew watched silently as Holli stepped respectfully to Lief's side. Jon returned to
the still form of his brother, and the reader was left beside the delver with only the algors
looking on.
"And what about you, Ryson? What will you do now?"
The delver choked back his growing anguish. "I'd like to stay to see the mountain
sealed for good," the delver expressed. "I remember when Lief told me how
representatives from all the races gathered up here during the first seal, when the sphere
was first entombed. I've thought about that image a lot since then. It looks like we're
about to seal the mountain again, but for different reasons. Back then, they were moving
apart, I think now we're moving together. I'd like to be a part of that."
"You have earned that right, as have all that are here now," Matthew remarked
respectfully, "but what of after Sanctum is sealed? What then?"
Ryson scanned the landscape from high atop Sanctum. He could see for leagues. The
land was open to him, inviting. "I guess I'll start by taking the algors back home. I want
them all to make it back safely. We've had enough death. After that, I have to keep a
promise and return to Burbon. I have to tell someone about what happened here, about
everything. After that, I don't know. It's like Lief said, the land is changing. I'm going to
have to help explain things. People may not believe what I have to say, but they won't be
able to dismiss what they've already seen." He stopped to consider his own proposals,
stopped to contemplate just how many options were open to him. For the first time in
what felt like a lifetime, he let a smile cross his lips. "You know, I'm not happy with how
things ended here. We're going to bury people I've come to know and respect, but Lief
may be right about something else. It may just be a wonderful time to be a delver."


King Bol Folarok rigidly kept his back to his son. He stared vacantly at the stone wall
before him.
"I am leaving Dunop," he said. The tone rang hollow, his emotions encased in a
vacuum. He spoke as if it were some well-rehearsed line he had already repeated a
thousand times. The announcement, though cold, remained firm, and it indicated more
than just a temporary absence. The finality of the statement slowly took substance, and it
lingered in the dimly lit chamber.
The words fell upon Prince Jon Folarok's senses like a lead weight. He looked upon
Bol's back, impatiently waiting for further explanation. He was offered nothing. He stared
breathlessly into the dark space between him and his father.
This was no time for the king to leave. What could be more pressing than the current
and growing unrest? Bol was needed here, needed now. He couldn't leave. Jon wanted
answers, but the back of his father wouldn't reply. Face me! But Bol would not turn. The
dwarf prince squinted as if hoping to see clearly through a dense fog.
"Where are you going?" Jon stammered.
"Does it truly matter?"
The temperature seemed to drop several degrees.
"When are you coming back?"
"I'm not coming back," King Bol replied with same sterile tone as before. If he had
sympathy for his son's confusion, he would not show it. His words remained as brittle as
frozen twigs. "Not ever."
"What?" Jon felt his innards tighten, a familiar attack of anxiety. He was never a
dwarf that dealt well with conflict or adversity. During the past few days, much of that
was heaped upon him. Now, he faced a climax of catastrophe, and the accompanying
nervous tension boiled over in his midsection. "What do you mean not ever?"
"I'm leaving Dunop and I will not be returning," Bol repeated, still not turning to face
his only surviving son.
Jon dropped his head and stared at the floor. He could not look at his father's back for
another moment as it only served to tighten the knot in his belly. The pain in his stomach
was making it hard to think. His mind nearly went blank. He fought to seize upon
something to say, words which might end this absurdity and set everything right. He
could find nothing. He blurted out his confusion.
"I don't understand!"
"It is simple." Bol extended a hand to the wall in front of him. He patted the polished
stone as if hoping to pull conviction from the intrinsic strength of the rock. "I can no
longer stay in this place. It reminds me too much of ...." He held his tongue just before his
voice cracked. He paused for long moments until his hollow tone returned. "I have made
grave mistakes, mistakes I can not simply forget or erase. I can do nothing but leave."
Jon knew instantly what his father could not say, knew that the king was referring to
the decision that had sent him and his older brother, Tun, to Sanctum Mountain. They
were sent to assist the elves, to destroy Ingar's sphere which held all the magic in the
land, but Tun was killed at the hands of a sand giant. That was the moment Jon first felt a
hole open in his soul. An empty hollow pain was his from that day on. It now felt as if
that hole was expanding.
To Jon, this was madness. He shook his head as if to scatter cobwebs from his face.
"You just can't leave. You're the king here."
"Am I?" A note of sarcasm edged Bol's tone. This time, the king did not swallow his
emotion. He let his bitterness spill out with his words. "Will the dwarves here even listen
to me anymore? I doubt it. The separatists gain power every day. They grow in numbers
even faster. They hate the monarchy and they want me out. They say I'm responsible for
freeing the magic and putting them all at the mercy of the spell casters that are sure to
follow. They say I have made dark alliances with the elves, and even the humans. They
call me the king who murdered his own son."
"No ..." Jon cried out, but the anguish in his stomach tightened his lips.
Though Bol would still not face his son, he held up his arm to silence any further
outburst. "That is what they say, and far too many believe. I can no longer be king, and I
can no longer live with the memories of this place."
The past which Bol spoke of now exerted its force upon Jon. The memories came
crashing down upon the prince. An image of Sanctum's outline pierced his mind. It once
held the sphere, but now it served as a tomb for his dead brother. It seemed, however,
Sanctum's toll had not yet been fully collected, and it now threatened to take Bol from
Jon as well.
In truth, this should not have surprised the prince. He should have almost expected it.
He had witnessed his father's spirit sag since the day he had returned from Sanctum with
bittersweet news. Yes, Ingar's sphere had been destroyed, but Tun had died in the effort.
Jon could still remember how the very life began to drain from Bol's face when he
reported the loss.
The entire town of Dunop wept for the death of its heir prince, but none endured as
much torment as the royal family. Bol was inconsolable in his grief. From the moment
Jon returned to the throne room alone, without his brother, Bol's collapse spiraled out of
control. He walked alone through empty corridors of the palace, muttering to himself. He
sought no one, and what remained of his family left him to grieve.
Jon wrapped himself in his own guilt. He struggled to return to his duties, to return to
the work he loved in the tunnels. Yet each cave and each dark corridor reminded him of
the bowels of Sanctum, the grave of his older brother.
Bol's wife, Queen Yave, proved even less supportive. She seemed consumed with an
inextinguishable anger. She found it more fitting to blame her husband than console him.
She was against assisting the elves at Sanctum from the start. To lose the son that was
always willing to defend her, support her even against Bol himself, it moved her beyond
grief. She burned with fury.
As Yave would make no attempt to comfort her husband, Bol slipped further into his
downward spiral. With this came the end of his desire to lead. He allowed rumors to
abound and did little to reaffirm his rule. The cry of the separatists was not a whisper.
They had called out their near treasonous desires with frequency and fervor. Bol did
nothing to quell them, as if he himself believed their venomous lies. And now it seemed,
at the very least, he would give them what they wanted. He announced as much as he
declared his intentions to Jon.
"I am relinquishing my right to the throne. I have already called for a scribe to prepare
the notification. When he returns with the scroll, I will sign it. I, thus, banish myself from
Dunop. You, being the only surviving heir, shall become king."
No other words could have brought greater fear to Jon's heart. His knees almost
buckled at the prospect. An image came to his mind, an image of himself on the throne;
weak, indecisive, and confused.
I do not want to be king!
Jon grasped at anything which might change this edict. "If the dwarves would not
have you as their king, why will they accept me?"
"They do not blame you," Bol replied sullenly, almost as if he scorned such
unfairness. "I have heard nothing from the crowds against you. Perhaps they think I
wished you dead as well, and it was only by luck that you survived."
Bol steadied himself in a moment of silence. He turned and finally faced his son. His
face appeared as hollow as his words. The thick skin under his eyes sank low with dark
circles. His beard, ruffled and unkempt, curled unevenly in every direction. The wrinkles
on his forehead appeared as if gouged with diamond-headed stone cutters. Though he
looked at Jon, his focus seemed haphazard and distant.
"This is how it must be. There is nothing else I can do."
Bol's haggard appearance dropped Jon further into despair. He needed a moment to
gather himself, but his father's wary glance and the tightening pain in his stomach gave
him no reprieve. He spoke out desperately.
"What of the queen? What about her? Are you abandoning her as well?"
Bol's reply remained absent of any emotion. "She abandoned me long ago."
"And what am I to do with her? What do I say? If I am king, she can no longer be
queen."
"She will have to accept this," Bol replied almost as if he found some satisfaction in
this thought. "It should be of no surprise to her, or to anyone. If I had died, such would be
the case. Though it might have been better had I actually died, the result of my leaving is
the same. I would not fret over it. She no longer seems content as queen. Just as I have
been powerless, she has neglected her duties as well. She may actually be relieved."
Bol was interrupted by the entrance of the scribe. Four guards and several ministers of
the court accompanied him.
"Forgive me sire," the scribe said with a shaky, uncertain tone. "but I thought it
necessary to gather witnesses. In the history of Dunop, no king has ever relinquished the
throne. I wanted to make sure no one would doubt your true intentions."
"No one will question this," the king responded. "If anything, they will question why it
took me so long."
"Are you sure you wish to do this?" the scribe pressed, wishing to make it clear to the
witnesses that it was the king's true intention and no one else's. "Perhaps you should wait,
take time to consider the proposal?"
"Nothing will change my mind. Let me have the scroll."
For the first time in his life, the scribe delayed acting upon an order of his king. He
stiffened as he opened the scroll, ignoring the king's open hand. He began to read every
word upon the parchment.
Before Tun's death, Bol would have angrily snatched the scroll from the hand of the
scribe, making it clear his orders were to be obeyed without hesitation. Now, however,
Bol waited meekly as the scribe read the declaration.
The scribe's hands shook visibly as he read the words on the parchment. His own
voice cracked as he spoke of Bol's self-proclaimed banishment, the last order of Bol
Folarok before he would relinquish his own throne.
The words stung at Jon like a thousand angry bees. He wanted to shout out for the
scribe to stop, but he did not. He wanted to flee from the room, but he remained. He even
wished to strike out at his father, but his hands remained at his sides.
The witnesses failed to notice the pain of the prince. They watched instead the
expression of their king. They looked for signs of opposition to the shocking declaration,
but there was none. They saw only acceptance in his eyes, and his hands, when he
eagerly signed the document.
The king, now a king no more, inhaled deeply. He turned his back one last time on his
son, and he moved quietly out the door.
Near shock, those gathered in the room turned their attention from the exiting king to
Jon.
Jon rubbed his face in despair. In this one moment, he appeared to age many cycles in
an instant. As he dropped his hands away from his face, wrinkles etched new lines around
his cheeks and forehead. His eyes sank further back into their sockets. His skin, normally
pale from the lack of light in the tunnels, now hung from his bones with the shadows of
even more pasty whiteness.
He looked to those before him with pleading eyes, and with despair on his lips. "What
do I do?"
At first, no one spoke. Finally, Hern Grottman, the minister of construction and a
close friend of Jon's, spoke the only true options. "You must announce the proclamation.
You must inform the queen of the edict, and then you must post it for every dwarf to see.
You must take the throne."
Jon groaned. The wail filled the chamber. He looked toward Hern with pleading eyes
as the thought of becoming king crushed his very soul. "Is there nothing else I can do?"
Hern paused as he grimaced. He considered what he believed to be the only other
option, an alternative which held dire consequences. "You can relinquish your right to the
throne," the minister said guardedly, as if he really did not wish to speak of such a
proposal. He saw a gleam of hope rise in Jon's eyes, but he quenched it almost
immediately. "This holds no real hope for you, Jon. You do not have an heir. There is no
one else to take your place. If you had an uncle or even a cousin, it might do, but that is
not the case. If you do not take the throne, you invite anarchy. We might be able to find
someone not far removed from the Folarok bloodline, but I seriously doubt our people
will accept such an appointment. The separatists have grown strong in these passing days.
They will see such action as an opportunity. I am certain they will rise and appoint their
own leader. Do you really wish to risk this? If they take the throne, they will certainly
execute every loyal member currently in your service."
Jon was unwilling to give up his hope in avoiding the throne. "What about my
mother? What about the queen? She can maintain the throne and rule as queen? It has
been done before. I would not have to become king and there would be no question as to
her authority."
"But there would," Hern replied swiftly. "The queen is not of Folarok blood. By
marrying Bol she became queen, not from her own heritage."
"Does that really matter?"
"It has in the past," Hern noted. "If you had a sister, you could easily relinquish to her,
but sadly, such is not the case."
"This is madness!" Jon argued. "You are basically telling me I have no choice. There
has to be another alternative. What if I died in Sanctum along with..., what if I were
dead? What then?"
"But you are not dead. And hopefully, you are not thinking of anything so foolish."
Hern bore into Jon's face with concerned eyes. "Suicide is not the answer."
"I'm not talking about suicide. I'm just asking what would have happened if Bol left
and I was not here to take the throne. What would you do?"
Hern rubbed his thick beard with his own powerful hand. His short stout fingers broke
spaces through the flowing hair before he tightened his hand into a fist.
"I suppose we would be forced to choose a new ruling family."
"Then do that now," Jon implored.
"We can not, for you are not dead."
"I could leave."
Hern clenched his teeth. He wished not to speak in such a manner to his friend, but he
was given no alternative. He inhaled and let the full width of his body face Jon with
unrelenting resolution. "Is that what you wish? Has the image of your father walking out
of this room, turning his back on you, has this so quickly vanished from you mind?
Would you now do the same to the people that depend on you?"
The dwarf guards and the other ministers held their breath in surprise at such words.
They stared with fixed astonishment upon Hern's icy features.
Hern ignored the gasps of those around him. He continued with his gaze locked upon
the prince who now had to be king.
"Yes, the dwarves of Dunop will survive without you. We will find a solution if that's
what you force us to do, but that is not how it should be. I've known you for some time,
Jon Folarok, and you are a Folarok. I know you don't wish to be king. You've never
wanted the throne, but it is yours now. I truly feel for you, my friend. I see that you are
aging before your time. I know this will only exact an even greater toll, but unfortunately,
this is not the time for you to simply withdraw. I will say this with no regard for my own
well-being; your father has done you and all of Dunop a disservice. He chose to run
rather than face his true responsibility. I will hope that you do not do the same."
Hern exhaled heavily before continuing. "I can offer you but one point of solace. If
you truly wish to relinquish the throne, wait until the time is proper. First you must quell
the fears of our people, you must bring calm back to Dunop. Then, and only then, will it
be advisable for us to search for a successor outside the Folarok name. But for now, I see
but two choices for you - accept your fate, or leave Dunop as your father has left, with his
back turned upon his people."
Hern finished his peace. He withdrew himself a pace from Jon and looked to the
ground. He closed his eyes as he waited for Jon's response.
The space which Hern allowed now isolated the prince. Jon felt as if a moat now
surrounded him. His shoulders went limp. He spoke, not with resolve, but with grudging
acceptance. "It shall be as you say. I will take the throne."
Hern, though grateful for these words, spoke now with a soft and unchallenging voice,
a proper tone for a subordinate addressing a king. "Dunop thanks you, and I thank you."
"I need your help, not your thanks," Jon responded sorrowfully.
"I will do all that I can. I will stand by you, I will advise you, if you allow."
"I need advice. I don't know what to do."
Again Hern stroked his beard. "There is much to do. The work shall be in deciding
how to do it. The people of Dunop will be advised of the change. I am sure word will
spread quickly. As to any formal announcements, let me suggest that as you take the
throne you do it as unceremoniously as possible. Without insult to you, I do not believe
this is a time for celebration."
Feeling as if being led to slaughter, Jon could only agree. "No, absolutely no
celebration. This is no time of joy, not for anyone."

Yave said not a word to her son when he entered her chambers. Her stare bore holes
through him. To those that accompanied the new king, she looked at him not as a son, but
as more of a shadow. When he announced Bol's proclamation, her anger rose.
"So, the bastard has left," the queen sneered. "And now you think you can walk in
here and cast me aside as if I don't count."
"I am not casting you aside."
Yave's face, now crimson with fury, swelled with distorted proportions. "You are as
much responsible for Tun's death as was your father, as were those filthy algors! And
now you profit from his death."
Like a spear thrown through the air, this barb drilled Jon to the core. Though not
taking a step back, he slouched after flinching from the pain. "I didn't want Tun dead. I
wish it were me instead."
"Will that bring him back?" Yave pressed.
"No," Jon replied meekly. "Nothing will bring him back."
Yave sneered. She folded stocky arms across her wide chest. She gathered in her
anger, and in long silent moments, she sized up the situation before her. Bol was gone,
Bol who refused to do what she asked. But would Jon refuse? Her eyes narrowed under
her fairly thick eyebrows.
"So what do you intend to do now?"
Jon straightened as best he could. He spoke in low tones, trying to keep his voice from
cracking. "I will have the proclamation posted, but there will be no ceremony. Word will
spread of the change. Hopefully, it will quell the angry calls that seem to have been
growing."
"And how will you approach the other matters?" Yave questioned expectantly.
"What other matters?" Jon replied almost defensively.
"If you are to be king, you now dictate policy. What will you do about our dealings
with the elves?!" Yave punctuated this with hostility. "Will you continue to have relations
them, even though it was the elves that made the request that brought your brother to
Sanctum?"
"We need the elves," Jon stated with apprehension to his mother's response. He
babbled on, hoping to quell the rising objections which were apparent in his mother's
expression. "The elves provide us with wood for our fires and with food."
"We can get both ourselves," Yave declared defiantly.
"You would have me send dwarves to the surface?"
"It has been done before."
"Not for such constant needs. We are not prepared for such a monumental change,
perhaps over time..."
Yave bit down on her lip. She wanted to press the issue, but instead, she pursued
another topic which obviously consumed her with greater ferocity. "Will you at least
demand their assistance when we deal with the algors?"
Jon blinked. He was not sure what the queen meant, not sure he wanted to know.
His dumbfounded demeanor irritated Yave. Her angry stare narrowed on a point
between his eyes. Her voice was as cold as mountain snow. "You do intend to deal with
the algors, don't you? You were at Sanctum. You saw your brother die at the hands of
their creation. You can't just let this deed go unpunished."
"It was not the fault of the algors," Jon protested. "It was the sphere ..."
Yave would not let him continue. "It was the algors! They created the sand giants.
They failed to control them! Did an algor die in the tier of the dwarves? No! But a dwarf,
Tun, died in their tier. They are responsible for the death of a dwarf prince! You can not
allow this to go unpunished. We must exact justice."
"There would be no justice in that."
"So you intend to do nothing about this?" Yave questioned in near disbelief.
"What can be done? Nothing will bring Tun back to us."
"But something can be done that will show them all that we still honor his memory!"
Yave shouted. "It will show every race that the dwarves will not allow their own to be
slaughtered and butchered!"
Jon shook his head in despair. "I can not give you what you ask. A war with the algors
will accomplish nothing."
Again, Yave exploded. "And you think you can be king?! I will not allow this! If you
don't do what is right, I will not support you. I won't step down."
"You don't have a choice," Jon said sadly. "None of us do."
Yave screamed with vehemence. "Give your orders, post your decrees! And then, see
who follows them. You think you can just take over, do you think any one will listen to
you?"
Hern, who stood beside Jon, could take the harangue no longer. For the past many
days, he had heard the whispers of revolt grow into near shouts. He held his tongue,
waiting for Bol to quell the tide of rebellion, an action never taken. Now, with Bol gone
and his friend facing the heavy duties of healing Dunop, he would remain silent no
longer.
"Enough of this!" Hern demanded. "You are no longer the queen. And you speak to
the king with words of treason. I will no longer permit this."
Yave threw a glance of utter poison toward the minister. "You dare..."
"No, you dare!" Hern cut her off angrily, defiantly. "And you dare too much. As I
have said, you are no longer queen. Your service is to the new king. If you can not hold
your emotions, then do as Bol. Leave Dunop. Leave now, before we face yet another
embarrassment."
It took great determination, but Yave broke her glare from Hern and turned it with
impatience towards Jon. "Is this what you want as well?"
Jon did not know what he wanted at this point, only that he did not want to be king.
He could only shrug with a pained expression.
Yave would not accept the response. "I will give you one more chance. Will you
restore honor to Tun's name? Will you attack the algors?"
"I can't do that."
"Then leave me. We have nothing left to talk about."
Jon simply nodded. He turned from Yave and beckoned Hern to follow.
Though the minister found the situation unresolved, the queen's intentions still
unknown, he would not question the king. Hern turned and followed obediently.
As the two exited and turned up a long corridor, their departure was followed by
Yave's angry shouts
"Tun should be taking the throne, not you! Tun should be king! Do you hear me?! Do
you hear me?"
Her screams faded behind Jon as he nearly ran down the corridor and away from
Yave.

Two days after Bol's departure, it seemed as if little had been accomplished by his
leaving. Word had spread of the change in monarchs, but the shouts of the separatists
continued to thrive. The growing mobs in the caverns of Dunop seemed as discontent
with Jon as they were with his father. Worse, word of the queen's defiance had also
spread. The separatist leaders took this news to heart and rumors of overthrow were now
actually being heard in neighboring cities.
Jon made weary but forthright efforts to bring stability back to the palace. He gathered
his ministers. He dismissed those who might doubt his leadership and replaced them with
dwarves with long allegiance to the Folarok family. He promoted Hern to Chief Adviser
and listened well to all his proposals. He left Yave to herself in the palace, hoping she
might eventually swallow her bitterness, but he revoked most of her authority by retiring
her staff, except for her personal servants.
As for the separatists, he offered a number of proclamations which he felt might
pacify them, or at least take the bite out of their contentions. He announced a desire to
hire and train dwarves to venture above ground and collect wood from Dark Spruce
Forest. Once dwarves were proficient in doing so, he would reduce trade, and thereby
contact, with the elves. He also stated his intentions to prevent any humans from mining
within the hills over their heads. Without revealing the location or even existence of their
underground city, they would discourage any such attempts. Any exploratory mine-shafts
begun by the humans would be blocked with reinforced dwarf construction, and any
resources the humans might deem valuable would be removed before they could be
found.
These decisions were announced with the hope of bringing a greater feeling of
independence and security to the dwarves of Dunop. Unfortunately, they fell short of the
separatists ultimate desires. These dwarves wanted complete independence from every
other race. They believed that only by gaining the grudging respect for their superiority
would the elves and humans truly leave them in peace. They did not want to hide from
the humans, they wanted the humans to hide from them. They did not want to rely on the
elves for anything, they wanted the elves to come begging to them for gems and metals.
None of Jon's new proposals would accomplish this. Trade with the elves would still
be necessary for food. The humans would be tricked into leaving rather than forced into
running in fear.
The one aspect, however, that truly allowed the separatists to grow in power was fear,
fear of the magic that spilled out of the sphere and now flooded the land. The dwarves
could never utilize this power as the other races. Its reappearance was not welcome. The
return of the magic truly allowed the separatists to fuel the fears of the other dwarves, and
those fears grew despite Jon's pledge to further Dunop's independence.
Hern recognized this with increasing alarm. Had Bol made these proclamations, they
might have sufficed. They might have actually ended the separatist movement. But Bol
had left, ran away without dignity, and this was the dagger strike to the heart of the
throne. Jon was looked upon as a weak king or not a king at all. The spreading word of
Yave's own defiance did much to encourage the scorn heaped upon the new monarch.
Worse yet, Hern was now receiving intelligence that Yave was actually courting the
allegiance of the separatist leaders. Mother of the king or not, this could not be tolerated.
It had to be stopped, even if it meant her execution. Hern addressed Jon with respect and
care over such a delicate matter, but with no less resolve.
They spoke in a small chamber away from guards and other ministers.
"We have a problem," Hern said gravely.
Jon slouched as if another weight was cast upon his shoulders. "What is it now?" His
voice carried the fatigue of the past few days.
"I am receiving news involving Yave." The adviser chose his next words very
carefully. "Word has already spread of her unwillingness to accept you as king."
"It doesn't matter what she accepts," Jon interrupted. His tone made it clear he did not
wish to discuss the situation with his mother. Hern, however, persisted.
"I'm afraid that's not the problem." Hern spoke faster now, trying to speak the full
point of his concerns before Jon stopped him again. "The fact is that she does not accept
your authority, and others now follow her lead. There is even talk of an alliance between
Yave and the separatist leaders. Such an alliance could have only one purpose, to remove
you from the throne."
At first, Jon wondered if such a prospect was truly such a misfortune. However, he bit
back his desire to escape his new responsibilities and attempted to focus on the validity of
Hern's distress.
"How much of this is rumor and how much is truth?"
"My sources are reliable."
Jon rubbed his wide wrinkled forehead. "What is the extent of the alliance, how far
has it progressed?"
"As of now, not very far. I doubt they've even met. To my knowledge, Yave has not
left the palace. Contact must have been made through couriers, possibly one of her
servants."
"We could question them, dismiss them without telling her." Jon offered as an easy
solution.
"She'd know, and it wouldn't stop her," Hern replied stoically. "It would just make her
that much more determined to advance the alliance. And it wouldn't stop the efforts of the
separatists to use her against you."
"Then what should we do?" Jon questioned in near exasperation.
"The only way to stop this and bring authority back to the throne is to have her
acknowledge your right to rule."
"She won't do that."
"Then you will have to force her."
Jon's face filled with horror. "I can't do that."
"Then banish her from Dunop."
"I can't do that, either."
"You're not leaving us with any other options."
"There must be something else we could do."
As he had done many times before this meeting, Hern contemplated the problem and
searched for clear solutions. He spoke openly to his king of his own interpretations. "We
face two threats. The first is Yave's unwillingness to accept your authority. The second is
a possible move of the separatists using your mother as the means to remove you from
the throne. You are obviously against dealing with Yave to rectify the first problem. The
second, however, can not be as easily ignored. I would have preferred that you would
have addressed both, but it is as you will. If we are to stop the separatists, and the anarchy
that would follow, we must keep Yave from making any deals with them. I can only
suggest that you have Yave watched and her servants followed. If we round up those that
show involvement in this conspiracy, we might yet end this rebellion without forcing a
showdown with Yave."
As if to immediately oppose this proposition, a shrill scream echoed through the halls.
Groans erupted, foreshadowed with the clash of steel. Shuffling footsteps broke softly
beneath the wooden door which separated Hern and Jon from the palace corridors. Hern
moved for his axe, but he was not a warrior. He fumbled with the handle just as the
source of the conflict exploded into the chamber.
The door crashed open. A handful of dwarves broke into the dimly lit room with
weapons drawn. Blood stained more than one of the razor sharp axe heads. They took
hold of Hern roughly and relieved him of his weapon.
"It seems she has moved quicker than I could have guessed." Hern grunted.
The rebels shook him and demanded silence.
Initially, Jon watched as if he was but nothing more than some distant spectator. His
demeanor changed drastically, however, as four rebel dwarves surrounded him with axe
and mace drawn. The new king stood his ground. He stood firm; angry. The burdens of
responsibility which burdened his shoulders dissolved with a sneer of his own fury. He
glared with defiance, and for the first time since Bol left, he stood with the aura of
authority. Finally, he appeared as a king.
He folded his hands across his chest, making no move for his own weapon. His head
turned upon his neck as his feet remained firm, cemented in place by concrete will. He
looked to each dwarf that confronted him. His tongue was silent as his eyes dared any of
them to commit the crime of regicide. Finally, he grew impatient. He wished not to
dignify the event by addressing these pawns, but he wished to move this encounter to its
conclusion.
"Well?"
The rebels hesitated. They looked among themselves. None answered.
Jon grunted with disgust. "I am going to the throne room. I assume one of your
leaders, hopefully more articulate than you, will be waiting there to give his demands."
Without an eye or a care to the rebels, Jon's hands dropped to his belt and unhitched
his mace. He threw it to the ground, thereby disarming himself. The weapon made a
lonely thud against the stone floor.
Jon stepped up to the lone dwarf that blocked his way to the door. "If you intend to
stop me, I suggest you swing that axe now. No? Then step aside." He turned his head
back to the others. "And unhand my advisor. He will accompany me. Follow if you will.
Your presence means nothing. It's your leaders I wish to address."
At first, those holding Hern did not comply, but a hard sneer from the king and his
defiance to move without his minister forced their submission. Hern stepped free and
moved along side his king. The rebels followed closely behind.
As Jon stepped past slain palace guards, rage filled his brain. He cursed heavily as
dwarves well-known to him lay in crumpled heaps near the wide doors of the throne
room. The sight of Yave sitting smugly on the throne, surrounded by dwarves unknown
to him, did little to ease his anger. He had to bite his lip in order to avoid a heated
explosion, but he would no longer cower before his mother. He faced her with shoulders
squared and back straight. He looked into her face with unblinking eyes. When he spoke,
his voice would not crack. It carried the weight of authority Yave would not recognize.
"What you have done here is criminal."
Yave was caught off guard. She expected Jon to whimper, not this.
The king disregarded her surprise. "Those that stand with you now also share this
crime. And none of this can be forgotten or overlooked. I will make no plea to you, no
demand for reason or request for mercy. I know you well enough that such words would
be useless. You are stubborn enough and filled with enough hatred to have your way
regardless of the means. It seems you have taken the throne. What is your will now? How
will you further divide the dwarves of Dunop?"
Yave stared into Jon's face as if she did not recognize him. "I am once again queen. I
will not divide the dwarves, but bring them together. I will bring them together by
seeking justice against those that have dared to wrong us."
"You are no longer the queen!" Hern shouted. "This is treason."
The queen placed an apathetic glance upon the advisor, but she would not be insulted
by him again. She mouthed an order as if calling for dinner.
"Kill him."
A rebel by her side drew a broad sword, and with deft precision, pierced Hern through
the heart. Hern doubled over and folded into a quickly growing pool of his own blood.
"No!" Jon cried and he attempted to rush to his minister. Several rebels took hold of
him and kept him in place. Tears filled his eyes. As he could no longer look at the lifeless
body of his true friend, he slammed his eyelids shut and the tears rolled down his cheeks,
disappearing into his gray beard.
Yave ignored the anguish of her son as did the remaining dwarves in the throne room.
He was powerless, he was no longer king.
The transference of power was illustrated in Yave's own transformation. Her
expression of anger and fury quickly mutated into determination fueled by newfound
power. She felt the approval of the rebels that surrounded her, and she chose to feed it.
"Let it be known that the rightful ruler of Dunop has retrieved her throne. Let it also be
known that all treaties and alliances are null and void. The dwarves of Dunop no longer
need to depend on the elves. We will begin collecting all food and wood for ourselves.
There will be no more trade with the elves. We will also no longer live with the threat of
the humans. Any human mine shafts begun near our city will be destroyed. Any humans
found near the entrances to our home will be summarily executed. It is also time we
amend the greatest grievance cast upon us. I declare war upon the algors, the ones
responsible for the death of Tun Folarok, the true heir to my throne."
Nodding approvals came from those rebels that surrounded Yave. They had their
victory. The dwarves would become self-sufficient and more. They would reaffirm their
superiority; they would teach a lesson to any that dared to oppose them. They would no
longer hide from the humans, and they would no longer rely on the elves. They truly did
not care if Tun's death was avenged, but they were more than happy to assert their
superiority over the algors as well. They welcomed the war.
A lone voice called out objection.
"What you're doing is wrong!" Jon heaved.
"Is it? Is it wrong to extract justice? Tun was killed by sand giants created by the
algors. You yourself brought that news back from Sanctum. The sand giants were merely
the weapons, the algors were the murderers. I will not let this crime go unpunished."
"What about your crimes?" Jon wailed. The knowledge of what had happened
tormented his soul. "Good dwarves lie dead because of your deeds. Who will bring
justice to their families that grieve for them?"
The queen remained unfazed. "People that protect or defend murderers create their
own grief. They do not require justice."
"That's ludicrous," the dethroned king cried. It was more of a moan than a statement.
Yave grew tired of this talk. "Take him away. We need not kill him. We will imprison
him and use him as an example that justice will always be served."
The rebels pulled at Jon and dragged him from the throne room.
Yave addressed her separatist followers. "This is a dangerous time. Magic is free in
the land and a threat to every living dwarf. Magic casters from every race will grow
strong with the energy that fills the air. They will wish to attack us. We must show we are
not weak, that we are unwilling to allow any race to commit crimes against us. The algors
will prove an example for the rest of the land. It is time for us to plan our attack."

Before the magic, before the breach in Sanctum, a delver could seek out the
wilderness for untold days. There was little to fear. The challenge was in uncovering the
secrets of the land, not in avoiding danger. The greatest threat was the weather, or an
occasional wild animal, perhaps a bear or a wolf. No real challenge for a delver. But that
was then, and things were different since the destruction of the sphere.
Ryson Acumen, the delver responsible for saving the land from Ingar and his talisman,
and just as responsible for the subsequent release of the magic, faced these changes every
day. The danger of dealing with the unknown, of dealing with dark creatures, and of
dealing with magical mutations was now his to assume. He could not ignore these things,
and he could certainly not avoid them. His instincts, his desires, forced him into the
wilderness, forced him into the peril. He would not disregard his feelings. He could not;
he was a delver.
The call was indeed strong, so many shifts in the land. He thirsted to uncover them all,
all of the new secrets created by the magic. With each exploration, he was never
disappointed. He found subtle alterations in the ground, in the brush, even in the wind.
The magical energy that had spilled out of the sphere seemed determined to make its
mark upon every inch of Uton, and though these changes offered much for an exploring
delver, they also created new evil.
The signs of bizarre and deadly threats manifested themselves in different ways. Each
time he scouted the land, each time he explored territory he thought he knew, he found
signs of creatures difficult to imagine. Dark creatures long absent from Uton and unable
to exist without the free flowing magic were now returning. These were creatures out of
nightmares. Monsters. Their descriptions would have been considered the delusions of
the insane had the creatures themselves not made their presence so notable. Shags,
goblins, and river rogues felt no inhibition in attacking and killing the other inhabitants of
the land. Though these creatures had returned to Uton less than a full cycle ago, they
already made their mark in the form of hundreds of victims.
On this day, late in the season of harvest, Ryson continued a scout of the hills
surrounding his newly adopted home town of Burbon. He surveyed the crest of a small
rolling hill. He looked upon the ground with dismay as markings within the soil revealed
unpleasant news.
"Shag tracks," he noted to himself. "They get closer to the wall every day."
His hand tested the depth of a single foot print and the hardness of the ground. "He's a
big boy," he grimaced as he looked around for fresher signs. He calculated these tracks to
be made the previous night, but there was nothing around which signaled immediate
danger. The hill grass was growing tall. It could hide a large shag if it stayed belly to the
ground, but not if it stood to move, certainly not one this large.
"I wonder what it was doing up here?" Ryson questioned. He carefully followed the
trail, and mimicked the motions he attributed to each track.
"Small steps. A kneel here at the edge. It must have been hunting. But what was it
after?"
The delver stretched his neck as he stood on tiptoes and surveyed the rolling hillsides.
His eyes immediately focused upon depressions in the grass.
Without hesitation, he glided down the hillside toward the markings. His own legs left
barely a trace in the tall thicket. Light steps lifted and dropped among the tall strands with
careful grace, moving them aside with the same gentle precision of a warm southern
breeze. When he reached his objective, the true wind shuffled the field back to its natural
order. The best of trackers would not have found his path.
Ryson remained alert with both ear and nose as his eyes traced across the older
depressions in the grass. Tall strands were pushed out of the way carelessly. They even
showed cuts, signs of short swords being used to hack through the thick brush. Ryson had
seen these signs before as well.
"Goblins again," he whispered.
The signs were unmistakable, including small footprints of several clustered together.
The tracks clearly indicated movement in a defensive formation, but the winding swath
through the field pointed toward scouting activity. It appeared as if Burbon was attracting
yet another goblin raiding party.
He followed the trail carefully, hoping to avoid an ambush. His nose could distinguish
no scent fresher than that which lingered from the depressions, but the wind was at his
back, any scent ahead of him would be difficult to seize.
He looked back to the top of the hill where he had found the shag prints. A question
came to his lips that he whispered with confusion.
"Why didn't the shag attack? There were only six goblins. He could have had at least
two of them for dinner."
He continued for a few steps more, crouched over with his head and back below the
top of the grass that encompassed him. He stepped lightly, making not a sound. It saved
his life.
The grass in front of him rustled in opposition to the breeze. Ryson froze. He caught
the scent of approaching goblins, heard their guttural whispers. With teeth clenched, he
waited for another rustle. When it came, he rolled to his side, moved out of the open
swath and into thicker cover.
The noise of his own movements was hidden by the clamorous shuffling of those he
hoped to evade. He kneeled as quiet and as motionless as a wary rabbit. His hand found
the hilt of the Sword of Decree.
A half-dozen goblins slowly moved into his sight, they were not alone. A single serp
walked with them. The sight angered Ryson.
Serps were the malevolent brains behind the goblin raids. Tactical and strategic
specialists, they cared little for actual combat. They used the easily manipulated goblins
to carry out their blood plans.
According to the legends, serps were an offshoot of the algor race, a tribe which had
dabbled in the dark recesses of the magical energy. They wished to break their struggle
between individualistic desires and group belonging that made the algors such an
unpredictable breed. They had succeeded in that province but left themselves reliant upon
the magic. When the magic was swallowed by Ingar's sphere, their presence faded as
well. Now, just like the magic, they were back.
Serps displayed greater characteristics of a snake than the algors, especially about the
head and neck. They had arms and legs, and walked upright, but the serps were shorter
than the algors, closer in fact, to the stature of a goblin. Serps also had tails, long thin
extensions of their back bones that slithered behind them as they walked.
Ryson now knew why the shag didn't attack. Serps were the most cunning of the dark
creatures. It was believed they could actually hypnotize the less intelligent monsters. The
legends included stories of packs of shags and river rogues banding together to attack in
force. Such behavior among territorial creatures and natural rivals would be impossible
without the driving force of a sorcerer's magic or the depraved treachery of a serp's
tongue.
Ryson leapt to his feet. The sudden movement caught the goblins off guard. They
could not load and fire their crossbows fast enough. The delver drew his sword and the
magical blade magnified the light all around them.
Shocked and bewildered, stunned by the glowing blade, the goblins scattered. The six
ran off in different direction. They spat as they grumbled words unintelligible to all but
their own kind.
The delver knew the battle was not over. He had seen this maneuver before. Goblins
would appear to flee in opposing directions only to regroup with crossbows ready. They
would form a perimeter around the enemy within range of their arrows. Anyone that
stood and watched, thinking the goblins defeated, would be caught in the center of a
multi-pointed crossfire.
Ryson did not remain still. He took only a moment to issue a notice to the serp that
recoiled in front of him.
"I'll be back. I'm not finished with you."
With his last word echoing behind him, he sprinted off to the east. He sheathed his
sword as he ran so as not to carry a beacon for the other goblins to take aim. A blur
through the grass, he easily caught the first goblin that struggled through the tall thicket.
He relieved the snarling creature of its crossbow and its short sword. Since he did not
need another goblin prisoner, he had caught many in the past season, he simply turned
away from the spitting, hissing creature. He tossed the crossbow and the sword far off
into the grass as he pressed upon the next closest goblin. Again, he disarmed the creature
only to ignore it. He was forced to do this only once more as the final three realized their
plight and ran off out of range.
With the goblin threat removed, Ryson deftly moved back to the original spot of
confrontation. Though he had no desire to capture a goblin, the serp was another matter.
He had not yet gained a serp prisoner, and it would do him well to earn one now.
Unfortunately, the serp was gone.
Ryson felt no distress, for he knew the creature was not far off. Serps were not known
for their physical prowess. While they were mentally superior to almost every other dark
creature, they could do little in the way of fighting, or even simply running away.
Almost instantly, he spotted the retreating tracks of the serp. His eyes followed the
path to a nearby patch of tall grass. He nearly laughed at the futile attempt to hide or
perhaps even ambush. Ryson bent down and picked up a small rock. He threw it
gracefully at the tall brush. The result was not as he expected.
One of the largest shags he had ever seen rose from the thicket and it showed an
eagerness to engage the delver. It stood over twice Ryson's own height and carried the
bulk of an ox. It snarled as its hands flexed with a desire to crush the delver's skull.
Ryson was more than surprised, he was confused. How could he have missed the
presence of such a monster? The question, however, answered itself as Ryson noticed
thick layers of grass clinging to the matted fur. In places, the monster looked more like a
walking pile of hill grass than a shag. Beyond that, he could almost smell the lingering
magic that seemed to surround the beast. The serp’s sorcery had helped camouflage the
shag from both Ryson’s eyes and nose. The delver made a mental note to be more careful
for such tricks in the future, but for now, the shag was closer than Ryson felt comfortable.
It roared in anger. Behind it, Ryson could hear the snicker of the serp.
Again, the delver found anger. This time, unfortunately, he could do nothing. He was
no match for a shag, especially one of this size. The hope of capturing the serp faded with
another roar from the shag's drooling mouth. Ryson grimaced, but would not accept total
defeat. If a serp was out scouting the hills around Burbon, it was obviously interested in a
raid. He decided to put a damper on such plans as he yelled a warning before retreating.
"I know why you're here, serp. This shag might protect you from me, but it won't help
you attack Burbon. I'll have the guard doubled, and I'll be watching for any signs of
goblin movements. You won't get close to Burbon's wall, let alone past it."
It sounded an empty threat as Ryson backpedaled away from the slowly encroaching
shag, but he knew it would more than suffice. The serp would certainly call off any plans
of an immediate raid. They didn't like being outmaneuvered, and they didn't like losing
their pawns because they had forfeited the element of surprise. Since Burbon would now
be tipped off to a possible strike, the serp would simply have to redesign its plans.
Ryson could not see the serp for it remained hidden behind the shag, but he knew it
had heard him. With that, he turned his back on the monster, and retreated in a blur.
After putting a good distance between him and the shag, the delver pulled to a halt as
he reached a lonely winding road which cut through these hills. The path wasn't used
much anymore, not by normal citizens, not while shags and goblins waited in the
surrounding area. It existed now only for patrols on horseback.
Ryson stood at the road's center, away from the tall grass which crept up to its sides.
He first checked all about him for immediate threats. He found none.
Feeling secure, he placed his concentration on what the serp and goblins might have
been after. To the northeast, his keen eyesight picked up a trace outline of the newly
constructed wall which surrounded Burbon. He was now thankful it was built so fast. He
looked to the gate towers which rose higher than the hills. He gauged the distance from
where he stood to the southern tower platform, and then factored in the last position of
the serp and the goblins.
"They were probably checking for blind spots," he noted to himself.
His eyes scanned the hills that rolled directly south of Burbon. He paced about as his
focus fell upon a ridge that might offer what the serp desired.
"They'd be able to get awfully close if they approached from that angle. We'll have to
build another tower."
The need for more construction forced him to consider the amount of work already
completed since he had moved to Burbon; a fortress wall and five towers. Now they
would need a sixth. He knew the people wouldn't complain. They accepted, even invited,
the rigid requirements that would keep them safe. Burbon was one of the last outposts
before Dark Spruce Forest, and nothing separated it from the wilderness which seemed to
generate the existence of so many threats. If another tower was needed, what else could
they do?
He thought of the previous town he called home, Connel, and how different it was
from Burbon. Most of it was simply due to size. Connel probably housed thirty times the
amount of people as Burbon, and it included farmland that stretched out beyond the
safety of walls or towers. Connel didn't even bother with defensive construction. They
simply forged an army. Platoons would protect the rims of the farmlands as delvers
would scout the perimeter on an ongoing basis. Hundreds of men stood armed and ready
at any one moment within the city to repel any goblin raid.
Such a thing was just not possible for Burbon, there were too few people. They had to
make the most of their small force of guards. That's why they all accepted the new wall
and the towers, and it was why they accepted him, the only delver to live in their midst.
They needed him more than Connel needed him. His explorations gave them warning,
probably saved them from being overrun completely. There were just simply too many
breeding grounds nearby for anyone in Burbon to dismiss the need for scouts. The Fuge
River, the hills, especially the forest; all held danger.
The delver took off for Burbon's main gate. He paused only at the entrance to warn the
guards of the serp's presence in the field. They tensed at the warning, but he bid them to
be at ease. He assured the serp wouldn't attack now. It was too early in the day and the
serp had been uncovered. Still, he would pass the news to Sy, the captain of the guard,
before night fall.
First, he wished to see Linda, the true reason he now made Burbon his home. He went
immediately to the Borderline Inn. He expected to find her behind the bar, but he found
only her substitute who said she had left to find him.
A twinge of anxiety took a nibble at the delver. She never went looking for him at
midday, when he was normally out on patrol. She knew he would be impossible to find.
If she needed to see him, it must have been for something of great importance. His
curiosity pressed upon his thoughts. He left for his house, thinking she would try there
after she found he was not with Sy.
He moved quickly up to the small cottage door, but he paused before entering. His
ears picked up a conversation. Low tones. Seriousness. His vast memory allowed him to
recognize the second voice immediately. He threw open the door with unbridled
enthusiasm. He saw Linda sitting across from more than just an old friend. The guest
looked just the same as when Ryson left him on Sanctum's peak.
"Lief!" the delver nearly shouted. "Lief Woodson."
With a huge smile, Ryson nearly leapt toward his guest. He wanted to say so much, he
couldn't get any words out of his mouth. He took Lief's hand with a joyous shake.
Linda stood up to meet her fiancé. She took his free hand and quickly explained.
"He came to the bar first. He was looking for you. Apparently when you last saw him,
you told him there was someone special at the Borderline. I only hope you were talking
about me. I wanted to help him find you and I didn't want an elf looking around on his
own. We went to see if you were with Sy, but some of the guards said you were still out
on a scout. I figured this was the best place to wait for you."
Ryson would not have been able to hide his happiness had he wanted to. "It's great to
see you, Lief. Godson, it seems like only yesterday, but then again it seems like forever. I
never would have believed to see you here. I remember how much you hated being in
Connel. I can't imagine this place is any better for you. They didn't give you any trouble
at the gate, did they?"
Lief shook his head. "No, they thought I was just another human."
"Another human? Not likely." He turned to Linda. "This is the first elf I ever met. I
didn't even know elves existed, and he just dropped out of a tree."
"I know," she replied with a smile. "You've told me a hundred times."
Ryson swerved his attention back to Lief. The delver wore an excited grin. Here
before him was a friend, but also an elf. Indeed, he had tried to explain it to Linda a
hundred times before, but he never believed words would do it justice. Now, he had a
much better way. "Hey, do me a favor. Show Linda your ears. She's never seen an elf
before."
Lief sighed, but acquiesced. He pulled the long brown hair away from his ears,
revealing their pointed tips.
Ryson looked to Linda. "Amazing?"
"Not for me. You've told me enough about elves and dwarves. I never doubted you.
You can't expect me to be as shocked as you were. I've already been through things like
goblin raids." She looked towards Lief. "You'll have to forgive him. Since we're getting
married, he wants me to know everything he knows. Some people might get excited at
the sight of an elf, but I know how much you helped keep him alive. I'm more grateful to
you than anything else."
"Married?" Lief offered a wide smile to the couple. "Congratulations to you both."
Linda returned the smile. She gave Ryson a slight hug as her hand slipped around his
waist. "Thank you. We don't have a date yet. Everyone, even me, is having a hard time
adjusting to the changes. We thought it would be better if we gave it some time for
everyone to adjust to what's happening. There's so much going on right now."
"More than you know," Lief added
Ryson immediately caught the tone of this grave announcement. For the first time, he
truly examined the elf's expression. There was joy to be sure, joy in seeing a friend, but
there was also concern, attention on a not so distant problem. He also considered what
would make the elf leave Dark Spruce. What would make Lief willingly enter the walls
of Burbon?
"You're not here to just say hello, are you? What's going on?"
Lief cleared his throat, as if reluctant to state the true purpose of his visit. "I'm afraid
there is a great problem arising."
"Again?"
Lief acknowledged the reference to their last problem; the trek through Sanctum's
core, the battle with Ingar, and the final destruction of the sphere. "No, this is not quite
the same. In truth, this does not even really effect the humans, and only to a slight degree
the elves. But it does involve us. You and me. It involves all who stood together within
Sanctum to save the land. It has much to do with the dwarves and what happened to
Tun."
Ryson grimaced at the memory.
Linda's focus shifted from the elf to her fiancé. She felt a tenseness growing in his
body. She knew the pain he felt when he recalled those who died to save the land from
the sphere. Tun was one of three to give their lives at Sanctum, and it was a memory that
would always haunt Ryson. She turned back to Lief and spoke up to prevent a lingering
silence. "Ryson told me of what happened in the mountain. Tun died while helping to
destroy the sphere. Why is that causing a problem?"
Not knowing how much Linda knew of the events, Lief recounted the most important
highlights. "Tun was a prince, the son of King Bol and Queen Yave, rulers of Dunop.
Tun was killed by a sand giant, a creation of the algors. Jon, Tun's brother who was also
with us in Sanctum, reported the event upon his return to Dunop. Things spiraled out of
control after that moment.
"Things were hard enough in Dunop as it was. The dwarves were split about helping
destroy the sphere at the very start. Many of them are afraid of the magic. When Jon
returned with the sad story, the magic was already loose, and the dwarves were ready to
blame anyone for their fears. The king became an easy target. It seems Bol could not live
with the guilt of sending his son to his death. He relinquished the throne to Jon and
banished himself from Dunop."
"So Jon's now the king?" Ryson interrupted. His delver instincts kicked in as he
attempted to imagine the circumstances in the underground city. He openly wondered of
the sequence of events and Jon's ability to lead. "That has to be tough, facing the death of
his brother and now his father leaves. How's he doing?"
"He is no longer the king," Lief replied gravely. "Queen Yave would not support her
younger son. I am told she blames him as much as she blames the algors."
At first, Ryson appeared dumbfounded. Nothing could be further from the truth. He
shook his head as if to get the words from his mouth. "That's ridiculous. Jon had nothing
to do with it, and neither did the algors. The sphere prevented the algors from controlling
the giants. Tun attacked on his own. That's why he died."
"I am afraid that is not how Yave sees it."
"What has she done?"
"She made a deal with the separatists, a group of dwarves that want to end all ties with
every other race. That is why I said it affects the elves only slightly and the humans not at
all. The humans have no working relation with the dwarves. You would probably not
even notice the change. As for the elves, we will see an end to trade with Dunop. It is not
such a major concern. A setback to our relations, yes, but we will certainly survive
without their assistance. If it all stopped there, I might not even be here now, but breaking
ties will apparently not satisfy Yave's anger. She has declared war against the algors."
Ryson rubbed his chin. He had known of wars between humans, but until this
moment, he never truly considered a war involving the other races. He had difficulty
envisioning what it might mean, a war between algor and dwarf, but what he could
imagine did not sit well with him.
"You said Jon was no longer the king. What happened, and why can't he stop this?"
"Rebellion, I'm afraid," Lief replied. "Yave's deal with the separatists included a
violent overthrow of Jon. Apparently, separatist warriors stormed the palace, killing
many dwarf guards loyal to the Folarok name. Jon has been imprisoned by his own
mother. As far as the reports go, he is still alive, but it is difficult to confirm. If he is a
prisoner, he would be kept in a palace cell. The separatists are careful, and they are
making sure there is no challenge to Yave's power. She retains her throne as queen and
now rules without much resistance. This is no true surprise, she was the queen under
Bol's reign and many dwarves still recognize her as the true leader. Those loyal to Jon
and the Folarok name are too few in number to provide any true threat. As long as Yave
appeases the separatists, she will remain in power."
"You're certain of all this?"
"Very certain. Through the period of Bol's departure to Yave's rebellion, we continued
to trade with dwarves who still saw elves as their allies. We received reports. We are still
receiving reports now, though not as many. Some dwarves see Yave's plans in their true
light, as nothing more than a thirst for irrational revenge. They see a pointless loss of life
and wish to do anything to stop it. Some are acting as spies and are calling for whatever
we can do. They must remain careful, however, for if they are caught reporting to elves,
they will surely be executed."
Ryson sorted quickly through the new information. He tapped his fingers together
lightly as he tried to place things in a logical order. "What is it the loyal dwarves have in
mind? If the separatists are entrenched in Dunop and the majority of dwarves accept
Yave's rule, I see little that can be done. I mean, what could we do? Send a war party of
humans and elves into Dunop to free Jon and restore him to power? I doubt we'd be
successful. We'd be fighting in their environment, upon their home ground. They'd
probably slaughter us. And even if we did succeed in sending a raiding party to free Jon,
what would that truly accomplish? Do you think any dwarf would trust him again if they
see humans helping him? No, this is a civil war. The dwarves have to call for Jon's return.
We can't force it on them."
"I agree, as do the elves of my camp. We feel for Jon and those dwarves that remain
our allies, but we should not try to exercise our will upon Dunop. In the long run, it will
bring no good. Those dwarves that call for our help also grudgingly agree, but they do
seek another option. One that I might have undertaken anyway."
"And what's that?"
"To warn the algors before the war begins," Lief stated firmly. "They believe that if
the algors have been forewarned, they can prepare for the inevitable battle. If a dwarf
assault is unsuccessful, it might create an embarrassment for Yave. The dwarves are
stubbornly proud. A loss to the less physically capable algors would certainly cause such
an embarrassment. Yave might be forced to relinquish."
Ryson eyed Lief dubiously. "You don't really believe that, do you? You don't really
think a dwarf would give up if she was beaten in one battle?"
Lief shook his head. "No. It will only fan her anger. She will rage with the desire to
attack with a greater force."
"Then why do you want to do this?"
"For the same reason you would, to warn the algors. Tell me truthfully, now that you
know what is happening, do you not feel honor bound to help the algors that stood with
us at Sanctum?"
Ryson did not hesitate in answering. "Of course I do, but how will that solve what's
happening in Dunop?"
"It won't, but as you say, that is as much a civil matter as anything else. We may not
be able to solve the dwarves' problem, but at least we can save the algors from a
slaughter. When we removed the sphere from Sanctum, we overcame the mistrust of
every race. That was a proud moment. Now Yave threatens to soil that moment. She
wishes to use Tun's death as a battle cry, to undo what we truly accomplished that night
within Sanctum. That is something we can not allow. If there must be a battle between
the dwarves and algors, let it be over the truth. Let it be over Yave's madness and her
thirst for revenge, not over her delusions of what happened in Sanctum. They are not the
same thing."
"I can't argue with you," Ryson admitted. "I just wish there was a way to stop the
whole thing."
"For now, let us be content with warning the algors. That should be the first step in
any case."
Again, Ryson pieced together the information given to him along with Lief's very
presence within his house. "So you want me to help you find the algors?"
"You know the way. I would suggest we go to the sandstone edifice you described as
their meeting place. The word can be spread there the fastest. I expect you still remember
exactly how to get there."
"Of course I do, but maybe I should go alone. I'll move faster that way."
Lief's jaw tightened. "Are we going to have this argument again? Why do you insist
on wasting our time with this? I owe as much to the algors as you. Why do you think you
always have to go alone?"
"It's what I do," Ryson responded firmly. "Besides, the desert isn't a kind place for
elves. Ask Holli. She'll tell you."
"She has told me," Lief responded indignantly. "And she will also accompany us."
The thought of Holli Brances broke Ryson's tension. He recalled his encounters with
the elf guard. Above all, he imagined her stoic preparedness, her ability and willingness
to deal with nearly any calamity. With Lief and Holli at his side before, they performed
the impossible. They had removed the sphere from Sanctum and defeated Ingar. How
much harder would it be to warn the algors and prevent a war? He thought he might
share his own relief with his elf friend, and he considered a tactic which might remind
them both of times when they overcame the truly insurmountable.
"I see. Well I know there's no point in arguing it any further. I know how stubborn you
both can be? You never took my advice, even when you knew I was right. I might as well
save my breath." Ryson paused. He hid a grin as he waited to see Lief's reaction. It had
been a long time since he had spoke with the elf, and he wondered if Lief still swayed
with the same emotional outbursts.
Lief surprised the delver. The elf seemed ready to give him a tongue lashing, but
instead he held himself. He grunted as he swallowed his annoyance. He looked to Linda.
"If you are truly going to marry this delver, I assume you want him safe?"
"Sometimes I wonder," Linda responded playfully. She remembered how Ryson
spoke of Lief's outbursts. She had known her fiancé well enough to see that he was only
trying to goad the elf into one of these flare-ups. She decided to help their guest instead.
Lief nodded to the delver. "Then I suggest you order him to have two elves escort
him."
"So ordered," Linda laughed.
Lief eyed Ryson with a smug expression of victory. "There, you are now truly
outnumbered."
Ryson surrendered. "I'm always outnumbered. You surprise me, Lief. You handled
that almost diplomatically. What happened to your quick temper?"
"I have learned to control it, but only when I want to."
Ryson smiled broadly. "You know, it really is good to see you. You remind me of the
good that came out of the sphere."
Lief bowed slightly. "Thank you. And you remind me that even the stubborn can be
swayed."
Ryson grinned. "How about Holli? Where is she now?"
"She's waiting outside the wall."
"Really? Why didn't you bring her with you?"
"She would not feel comfortable enclosed within the walls. She would also find it
difficult to hide her elf guard training. What do you think would happen if your human
guards at the gate saw her constantly searching for hidden threats?"
"They'd get nervous."
Lief nodded in agreement. "And they would probably keep us. No, it was better to
leave her where she is. She is scouting the perimeter."
Ryson brought a hand to his forehead. "Godson, I forgot about the serp. It was
checking the walls with a group of goblins."
"If you're worried about Holli, there is no need," Lief began.
Ryson raised a hand to hold the elf's tongue. "I'm not worried about Holli. I was with
her in the Lacobian desert. I know she can take care of herself. It's here, Burbon, that's the
problem. You see, I'm the only delver here. After seeing that serp, I should be spending
the next several days scouting for goblin movements."
Lief shook his head as if to animate that this was not truly possible. "But we must
leave now, and we can not leave without you. We may not be able to find the algors.
Holli believes she might find the way, if absolutely necessary, but she's not a delver
scout. There is a distinct possibility we might get lost."
"I can't let you go alone," Ryson exclaimed. "Getting the algors involved is as much
my responsibility as anybody's. And I wouldn't want to live with the thought of you
getting lost out there."
"I wish I could give you some advice in this matter," Lief stated sincerely. "but the
truth is the algors must be warned, and I can not risk losing even a day in waiting. I really
don't know how quickly the dwarves plan to mobilize."
"I know, I know."
"Let Burbon's guard handle the goblins," Linda announced suddenly. It held the edge
of an order.
Ryson looked at her with a raised eyebrow.
She did not back down from her statement.
"You can't handle everything yourself. If you're needed to warn the algors, then you
have to go. You can't keep trying to do everything at once."
"I'm not trying to do everything at once," Ryson protested. "This is just a bad time. If I
hadn't seen the serp, I probably wouldn't worry about leaving."
"Yes, you would. It's only been a couple of seasons, but I already know you too well.
You think the safety of this town is your sole responsibility. Don't deny it."
"It is my responsibility," Ryson stated without hostility. He was not trying to argue the
point, only stating a fact.
Linda remarked on truths of her own. "But not yours alone. There are others here that
can protect Burbon. Sy, Enin, the guard. Sy can come up with scouts of his own. They
won't find everything you could, but they'll let the goblins know we're waiting for them.
I've learned enough about them from what you've told me that they won't attack."
Ryson could not argue the point. He looked to Lief. "She's probably right."
"Then is it settled?" the elf asked. "You will lead us to the edifice in the desert and
together we will warn the algors?"
"I guess so."
"The sooner we leave the better," Lief nudged anxiously.
"I can leave now. I just have to make one stop at command and let Sy know what's
going on."
Ryson looked to Linda with a somber smile, trying to mask his sadness in saying
good-bye. "I'll be gone for at least five days, but you better count on seven or eight,
maybe longer. I guess you're getting used to this by now."
"I'll never get used to it, but I'm learning to accept it." She grabbed him around the
neck and embraced him tightly. "You take care of yourself."
"I will," he whispered and grudgingly moved away from her to the door. "I'll tell Sy to
keep an eye on the house and the tavern."
Reluctantly, he turned from Linda and stepped out the door. He walked briskly down
the path to the road, trying not to look back, trying to curb the growing emptiness which
assaulted his being. His unease in leaving was a recently discovered sensation.
Before he committed himself to Linda, he found it so easy to simply up and leave, to
go off into the wilderness without a care. Now, it was never easy. Now, an anchor
existed. Leaving Linda caused him pain. A hole opened in his center, a hole which would
not be filled as long as he was away from her.
Still, he remained a purebred delver, and the need to explore would always call to him.
As he looked to the open skies to the southwest, he thought of the waiting desert and the
algors. Surely, this would fill his craving for exploration. His steps carried him away
from the front of his home, and he considered the contradiction of his predicament. Even
as something called for him to stay, the gnawing desire to explore beckoned him to leave.
Like a dog that pulled on the leash held by its beloved master, Ryson felt opposing forces
exert themselves upon his soul. He wished to run free, but he did not want to leave that
which he loved. In days to come, he would learn to appreciate this, see it as more of a
blessing than a curse. Even now he began to understand the true triumph in his mixed
feelings. Upon leaving this day, his delver soul would sing, but that part of himself which
he gave to Linda would bring him back to Burbon. He finally had a true home.
He was silent in his thoughts for but a moment. He walked with the glide of his delver
heritage, Lief at his side. He turned to his companion with the curiosity that was his
nature. He wished to consider something else, something other than his leaving. He
unleashed a general question in order to discover news from a friend he had not seen in
over a season.
"So what's been happening with you? I've scouted some portions of Dark Spruce, the
sections closest to here. I've met up with some elf guards. They seem to know who I am,
but they don't like to talk about their camps. Security, I guess."
"Changes, good or bad, abound everywhere," Lief responded mysteriously. "My camp
is no exception. The elves are learning to live with these changes. We face new threats,
mostly in the way of river rogues and goblins."
"How are you getting on without Mappel?" Ryson did not want to stir any sadness
with the memory of the loss, but he imagined the death of a camp's elder had to cause
significant shifts.
Lief remained tight-lipped. "Mappel will always be remembered proudly. We learn to
live with each loss."
He was less than convincing. There was something behind his words which perked the
delver's curiosity. It was not sadness over Mappel's death, but something else, and Ryson
pressed for the information.
"Does that mean the camp is more or less reacting normally to all this? I mean,
whatever you might consider normal with the return of the magic and now this crisis with
the dwarves?"
Lief side-stepped the issue by pointing out his own observations since entering
Burbon. "With the events of Sanctum, we all had to expect that life in this land would
never be the same. I look about this human town and see the proof for myself. The wall
that surrounds this dwelling area is of new construction, as are the towers."
"That reminds me," Ryson interrupted. "I have to tell Sy of the need for a new tower.
We seem to have a blind spot the goblins will be more than willing to take advantage of."
"That is exactly what I mean." Lief played upon the issue. "We must now concern
ourselves with matters previously unimportant. I doubt there was a need for towers before
the sphere was destroyed. Humans never had to deal with goblin raids. It is almost
impossible to remember what things were like before the sphere breached its tomb. But it
is like this all over. Every inhabitant of the land must learn the new way."
Lief stopped and bid Ryson to do the same. The elf turned about to make sure they
were far from Linda and the delver's home. Seeing that no one was in ear shot, he spoke
somberly. "I did not wish to bring this up in front of your betrothed. No need for her to
worry, but you should be warned of the potential threat. Our objective is simple, but our
path is not. As you know, to reach the algors we must cross the Lacobian. The desert is
now a very dangerous place, very different from when you last crossed it to escort the
algors home. It has become a place for novice sorcerers and wizards to practice their new
found skill. As elves, we are more sensitive to the use of magic than perhaps any other
race. Many have felt the surge of power in the direction of the Lacobian. We have sent
scouts to the rim of the desert. They have all reported back with little information, but
they remain certain that farther in the desolation, magic casters are honing their skills."
"Do you think they pose a threat to us?"
"Who knows for sure? They may ignore us. They may hide from us. Or, they may use
us to further practice their powers. I would doubt any have had time enough to learn the
arts to be truly dangerous, but there are always exceptions."
"I guess we'll just have to stay away from them."
"That is exactly why I have told you this. You must remain alert to this possibility,
and although reaching the algors is our primary concern, I do not wish to stumble across
a bold magic caster."
"I'll do my best to steer us clear."
"I know you shall."
The two moved on under Ryson's direction. They came to a square brick building with
no sign. It was the command post and Ryson guided Lief inside.

At the guard headquarters, Ryson moved past two soldiers with Lief at his side. The
guards let them pass into Sy's office, each nodding in recognition at Ryson and taking
long glances at the tall, thin stranger that walked with him.
Sy Fenden, captain of the guard, just dismissed a subordinate with new duties. He
looked toward Ryson with an expression of welcome, unlike the first time he met the
delver. But he, like everyone else in Burbon, gained a new appreciation for Ryson now
that the magic seeped through the land.
"Good day, Ryson." He made a quick nod to the stranger. "Friend of yours?"
The tone was pleasant and accommodating, but also somewhat demanding. Sy had
maintained the duties of mayor and chief officer ever since the first goblin attack on
Burbon. When the people no longer trusted the duly elected officials, they had turned to
the town guard for protection, as well as leadership. This newcomer was unknown to
him, and it was his duty to check all strangers.
"Hey, Sy!" Ryson greeted the captain as he stepped in the office, allowed Lief to move
past, and then shut the door. "Yes, this is definitely a friend."
Friend or not, Lief immediately struggled with the environment. It was hard enough
for an elf that lived in the wilderness of Dark Spruce to be surrounded by the fortified
wall and the myriad of buildings of Burbon. Now, he stood in a room with no windows
and only one door, which was now closed. He could deal with the caves of the dwarves
easier than he could deal with this. This environment was manufactured, unnatural.
Straight even lines, squared corners, perfectly aligned patterns of bricks; it was so
different from the creative, nearly whimsical pattern of the intertwined branches of his
true home. When the trees grew together, they did so with a strange balance between
confusion and harmony. The construction of the humans tossed aside this balance and
accented the straight, level and organized. It was disorienting to the elf.
Ryson sensed Lief's displeasure. One glance at the elf revealed the taught muscles, the
eyes searching for an opening to the sky. If Ryson yelled out suddenly, he imagined Lief
might jump to the ceiling. The delver took no pleasure in this and spoke quickly to hasten
to the point of the meeting. He made introductions first.
"This is Lief Woodson. Lief, this is Sy Fenden."
Lief bowed in greeting.
Sy's eyes fell upon the elf with great interest. "Lief Woodson? The elf? The one from
Sanctum?"
"The same," Ryson acknowledged.
Sy immediately threw out a firm hand. He was meeting an elf, a member of a race he
never knew existed until a few seasons ago, but he was also meeting what he considered
a soldier, a good soldier. Ryson reported every event which occurred within Sanctum,
Lief performed beyond the call of duty, acted heroically in the face of true danger. That
kind of bravery immediately earned Sy's respect, and he felt no hesitation in offering his
praises.
"Ryson told us what happened in Sanctum. I can't say that I understand it all, but I've
learned to trust what he says. You were one of the first to recognize the danger. You
knew something had to be done. Everyone here is in your debt."
Again, Lief bowed. "Thank you, but there are no debts."
Sy would not allow his praise to be revoked. "Be that as it may, I know I want to
thank you."
Once more, Ryson spoke quickly. "There are some new problems. It seems there are
repercussions from our endeavor at Sanctum." Ryson searched for the words to explain.
They were not easy to find. "It's difficult to explain, but it seems the dwarves ...,
remember what I told you about Tun, the dwarf who died? Well, the dwarves aren't
happy with the algors. They're apparently going to start a war."
To his credit, Sy showed no sign of doubt and did not ask for lengthy explanations. He
immediately focused on his primary responsibility.
"What threat does it have upon Burbon?"
Ryson shrugged. "As far as I can tell, none."
"Wars often spread," Sy said with a knowing tone.
"But the dwarves live underground and the algors live in the desert. I think, at least for
now, it's not a threat to us. Not to you anyway."
Sy picked up on the reference. "But it is to you?"
Ryson grudgingly nodded acceptance. "Lief and I are going to warn the algors. We'll
be gone for a few days."
Now it was clear, clear why the delver was so uneasy. Sy considered the thought of
defending Burbon without the delver's services. He knew there would be times when the
delver wouldn't be available, but he was as weary of the coming dormant season as
anyone else. At first, he grasped for options.
"Is this something that can wait?"
"No, the algors have to be warned as soon as possible."
"I was hoping that you might be able to wait until I get another delver from Connel."
"Too long," Ryson replied sadly.
Like a true strategist, a true commander, a true soldier, Sy accepted the situation. He
nodded his head, animating his acceptance. "We'll be fine. We'll put men on horseback,
send them out in patrols of four, armed to the teeth. I'll have to assume the goblins will
know you're gone. They'll look to take advantage, I'll make sure there isn't any. I can put
lookouts on the walls as well as the towers."
Ryson was about to explain the presence of the goblins in the hills when he was
interrupted by a knock on the door.
Sy did not even glance toward the entrance. "Come on in, Enin." And Enin opened
the door and stepped through.
Sy felt the need to explain his apparent supersensory perception to the elf. "I know his
knock."
"He has very good hearing," Ryson added. "Almost as good as mine."
Before Ryson could make an introduction, Enin's attention centered directly upon
Lief. "This is an elf. Am I correct, am I correct?"
"Yes, Enin. You're correct. This is Lief Woodson, an elf."
Enin was delighted, not at meeting an elf for the first time, but for his own
perceptions. "I knew I felt something strange. You came in earlier, right? Around noon
time, right?"
Lief looked to Ryson with confusion.
"He's a practicing wizard," Ryson answered the unasked question. "He's been focusing
on sensing races other than humans, kind of acting like an alarm system. He's been
experimenting with spells so we can be prepared for goblin raids."
"It's not really a spell, not really," Enin interjected. "More of an aura I allow to
surround myself. The magic seems to bend differently around different races, especially
the ones that need the magic to walk on the land. You didn't bend the magic like that, but
you were different, different like our delver friend, not the same as humans."
"He's like a spider. If something other than a human walks in his web, he'll know."
Ryson then turned to Enin. "By the way, I came across a serp in the hills today. He was
with six goblins and a shag. Did you sense any of that?"
Enin displayed unhappiness. "No, not at all."
"They probably didn't come close enough to the wall, but they were out there."
"Missed them, huh?" Enin rubbed his chin as his concentration seemed to fade out of
the very room. He began to chatter, talking to Ryson at first but then only to himself,
ignoring everyone around him. "I don't seem to have great range. I know when they get
close to the wall, and certainly when they're inside, but not too far beyond. I wonder
why? I guess I couldn't sense things forever. I'd go crazy. I'd sense every creature in the
land, and then what good would I be? I'd just be confused. But I'd like to increase my
range. I should be able to sense the hills. I wonder if I could come up with a spell which
would energize me, give my senses a boost. No, that wouldn't be any good. Spells take
energy. I would only be able to boost it for short periods. That might be helpful if we had
an idea when they were coming, but it wouldn't be any good for general surveillance.
Still, I should consider this, a spell which would increase the range of my senses. Even
for a brief period, that might be a very useful spell. How would it go? Wind and earth?
Air might even be better. Mix of a sight spell, expansion, and energy? I don't know. I
better be careful with this one. I might accidentally send out a force wave."
"That would be helpful," Sy said sarcastically.
Enin heard Sy's voice but not his words. He snapped back to the here and now with a
confused expression.
Ryson noted the scrutinizing stare of the elf upon the wizard. "You'll have to excuse
him. He does that sometimes. He starts thinking of spells, and he just goes off into
space."
"He should be careful," Lief replied with an edge. "Speaking out loud of possible
spells, spells with power, is a dangerous thing."
Enin looked quizzically at the elf. Lief was tense. Was he tense at the presence of a
wizard? No. He was tense at being in such a small room. Still, the elf was weary of him,
Enin could sense that much. The elf apparently didn't like wizards, certainly not human
wizards. Perhaps 'like' was too strong a word, but the elf certainly didn't trust Enin.
Enin faced a good deal of that from his human neighbors within Burbon, at least at
first. Now, after he proved to be helpful, he earned their trust. But this was an elf. In
Enin's studies, he learned that the elf was the most capable of seizing the magical energy.
Why would an elf mistrust him? It hurt him, and he spoke openly of it.
"You don't trust me." A simple statement that revealed a hint of pain.
Lief frowned, irritated by being exposed by a novice magic caster. He responded
sullenly. "The magic is new to you. It is dangerous to stumble about blindly trying to find
new uses."
Enin felt no insult. Instead, he considered the possibility. Again, his attention slipped
from the room. He spoke to himself, not to Lief, or anyone else. "Am I stumbling about?
I don't think so, not really. I build from spell to spell. Each new one is a key to another
and another. There is knowledge in that. Taking small steps on what is known. But what
if I simply threw the keys away, or ignored them for once, simply began to alter the
magic in some new untried way? That would be stumbling. I might make a major
breakthrough. Then again, I might destroy myself or the entire town. I guess that's what
they're doing in the desert, away from everyone else."
Sy shook his head. He allowed Enin's attention to remain on his personal questions as
he spoke to Ryson of a more immediate danger. "You came across a serp in the hills?
With goblins and a shag?"
"Unfortunately, yes."
"Scouting out the wall?" Sy demanded.
"Probably."
Sy grumbled, almost like the light growl of a panther.
Ryson tried to ease his worries. "I scattered the goblins. Disarmed a few and sent them
running."
"They'll be back."
"Maybe, maybe not. I called out a warning to the serp before I left. I told him we'd
double the guard and be ready for any raid."
"And we will," Sy accented. "What happened with the shag?"
"I can't take out a shag on my own," Ryson admitted slightly embarrassed.
"I never expected you to, but I still need to know what it was up to."
"It was with the serp."
"Not attacking?"
"Only me."
Sy folded his hands behind his back as he scanned the maps of the surrounding hills.
"So the serp's got a shag on its side now."
"It seems."
"That's not very comforting."
"It's a big one though. It'll be easy to spot in the clearing."
"Well, if Enin didn't sense them, they didn't get too close. I still don't like it."
Ryson finally struck on the true point of his visit. "I think they were looking for a
blind spot. And I think they might have found one. One of the reasons I came here was to
warn you to build another tower."
"Where?" Sy asked firmly.
"Southeast corner of town."
"Really? I can't remember them ever coming from the east?"
"The blind spot is more to the south. We need the angle to cover it."
Sy rubbed his chin, considered the whole of the news brought by the delver. "I'll have
to take a look at that. I don't think there'll be a problem with building another tower,
especially if it helps keep the goblins away, but what bothers me is that shag. What's a
shag doing with a serp and a pack of goblins? I though shags ate goblins. And even if we
build a sixth tower, a shag might not care if we see it coming or not. If it wants to attack,
it may run right up to the gate."
"I don't think it was there to attack. It looked like it was just guarding the serp."
"Maybe, maybe not. Dealing with goblins is one thing; dealing with a hoard of shags
is another."
"I only saw one." Ryson countered.
Sy remained weary. "That may just be the first of many. The serp may be tired of
being beaten back from the wall. It may have decided it's time to bring in a bigger
weapon. I want to take a look. If you're not going to be here the next few days, I need to
be extra careful. You don't mind do you? You can point out where they were, and you
can tell me anything else I need to know about this dwarf-algor war."
These words seemed to snap Enin to attention. "A war? Between the algors and the
dwarves?"
"That's what Ryson tells me," Sy answered then turned his attention back to the
delver. "You have a quick moment before you leave? I just want to go up on a tower and
you can point out where they were."
Ryson looked to Lief. "It's the least I should do. I'm not going to be able to scout for
them for the next few days. Do you mind?"
Lief showed no reservation. In fact, the thought of leaving the room for a tower
appealed to him. It would not be exactly like climbing the trees of Dark Spruce, but it
would be close.
The four quickly exited the office and the command post all together. Lief breathed
deeply the open air. The buildings that lined the streets they walked still seemed to close
upon him, but he was at last free of the tiny enclosed room.
They spoke of the algors and the dwarves as they walked briskly to the southwestern
tower. Sy allowed the guard to remain as the four made the climb to the elevated
platform. He did not always openly offer information to his soldiers, but he never
deliberately hid things from them, either. He spoke of the dilemmas forthright,
unconcerned that the lookout would overhear.
"Where did you come across the serp?"
Ryson pointed deep into to the hills. "There, just beyond the third hilltop from the
clearing."
It was a good distance away. Sy nodded to the budding wizard. "That's why you didn't
sense them Enin."
"Yes, that is rather far."
Sy gazed out over the rolling hills.
"And the shag was with the serp?"
"Not the whole time," Ryson admitted. "I found shag tracks on the top of that third
hill. I believe it was acting like a lookout."
"So the serp is using some of our own methods."
"It would seem. Anyway, when I first spotted the serp, the goblins were with it, but
not the shag. I chased the goblins away. When I came back to get the serp, the shag was
ready to defend."
"It does sound like a personal guard. And you saw no signs of another shag?"
"None."
"That makes me feel a little better. Now, where's this blind spot?"
Ryson pointed to the edge of the clearing directly south of Burbon. "See the base of
that hill, the one that extends furthest into the clearing? What if they crouched below it?
At what point would they be visible to this tower?"
"They wouldn't, but the tower over the south gate would have a direct view of them."
Ryson shook his head. "It's too high. The lookout would have to lean out over the
railing to see below him at that close range."
"And if he did, he'd take an arrow between the eyes," Sy acknowledged.
"Exactly."
Sy tapped his fingers together. "They'd get right to the gate. It's surprising it took so
long for them to find it."
"Maybe this is a new serp. I haven't seen one with a shag guard before."
"Not a good time for you to be leaving."
"I can't do much about that."
"I know, I'm just reminding myself of what I'm up against." Sy looked over to the
southeast corner of the wall. "You're right about the new tower. That'll cutoff the blind
spot, but it's going to take a few days to build. I'm going to have to keep guards outside
the gate until then. I don't like it, but I have no choice."
"A spider!" Enin blurted out.
The rest of the men upon the tower gazed at him questioningly. Enin ignored them,
whispered confusing words, until Sy called for his attention.
"Enin? Enin!"
"Huh? Oh sorry, I was just thinking out loud."
"I know. What were you thinking?"
"Ryson compared me to a big spider. That's the answer."
Sy shook his head. "Your senses are always helpful, but it won't be enough in this
case. You won't feel them until they get close to the wall, by then it'll be too late. I have
to be warned when they get close to the clearing, not the wall."
"They won't get to the wall," Enin asserted. He stopped his explanation and again
stared out to the edge of the clearing. He spoke as if he were alone on the tower platform.
"Spider's web, spider's trap, spider's warning. It's all the same. Make the trap where the
flies are, or where the flies can be caught. A binding spell, like a force field. I've done
that before. I need to alter it slightly, not a shield but a trap, a web. Think of a spider.
How to focus the energy? Yes, that's it, that's definitely it."
Without another word, Enin raised his hands. He looked first to the sky then to the
blind spot as defined by Ryson. His fingers curled, pulling in the magical energies that
flowed freely in the very air that surrounded them all. He tapped into his inner power as
well, the energy he allowed to fill his core. He became a siphon and a conduit, mixing the
power of himself with the free flowing magic. Two intertwining circles of a pale white
hue formed around his wrists.
Ryson watched with great interest. He had seen wizards cast spells before; after all he
had battled Ingar upon Sanctum. Still, this scene filled him with wonder. A seemingly
normal human was pulling power from the very air. When he was young, he thought of
magicians as entertainers that shuffled cards with extraordinary skill. Now, now they
were powerful men and women with the ability to control energy of an unknown
magnitude.
The sight was awe-inspiring, perhaps even more so for the elf that noted the scene
with guarded amazement. The white light and the spheres indicated a skill he could not
have expected. He said nothing, but the significance of such power was not lost upon
him.
Enin kept his attention focused upon his spell. He ignored those that watched even as
he could sense their growing amazement. As the circles of energy swirled, he redirected
his hands at the base of the hill to the south. The rings of power flew from him, flipping
over and over as they danced through the sky. They hit the ground at the point of the
blind spot. Hundreds of long strands exploded from the circles, forming a giant web of
glowing white. It remained visible as its whiteness clashed with the green and brown hill
grass.
Enin nodded in approval. "It's visible in the day, maybe even at night. I don't know
how much it will glow. It won't matter. If they see it, they'll know their blind spot is no
longer feasible. If they don't, we'll have a few more prisoners."
"They won't be able to break through it?" Sy questioned.
"They could. It's not the strongest spell in the land. They'd be able to cut through it
with their short swords, but not while crouching down and hiding from this tower. It will
take a little more effort than that."
"What about the shag? If a goblin can cut through it, it won't stop a shag for a
moment."
Ryson offered his own understanding. "A shag won't be able to hide behind the slope
of that hill. It's too big."
Sy nodded. A shag would be too big to utilize the blind spot. The lookout from this
tower would spot it. Only the slight goblin could truly use the edge of the hill for cover.
The web would work. He reveled in the victory. It was not always the actual physical
struggle which turned the advantage. More often, it was the battle of strategy, the
deployment of forces, obstacles, and resources. Confident in the overall approach of the
web, Sy focused on the details.
"How long will it last?"
Enin closed his eyes. He could feel the web; it was still part of him. "Half a day. I can
cast another spell tonight and again tomorrow morning."
"It won't tire you out?"
"It doesn't require a great deal of energy to cast."
Sy turned to Ryson with a greater sense of comfort. "It appears as if we have solved
our blind spot problem. They might even see the web if they make another scout of the
wall. Actually, I hope they do. It'll let them know we're aware of their plans. If they had
just seen us constructing the tower, they might have attacked to press their advantage.
Now, they'll find out they've lost that edge."
"You'll still send out scouts?" Ryson questioned, but he already knew the answer. Sy
was too careful, too attentive to subtle changes to rest upon a single solution.
"Absolutely. I'm not worried about the blind spot anymore, but there's still a serp out
there with a shag doing its bidding. That still makes me nervous. I'll send out scouts at
random intervals."
"Tell them to scatter their formation if they go in the high grass," Ryson advised. "The
shag was covered with grass to blend in. I didn't see it until it stood up. If your scouts
cluster together, it might surprise them all at once. They've got to leave room so they can
cover each other. And it was hard to gain its scent, the serp’s own sorcery I think."
"Amazing. Camouflage magic," Sy gave his adversary its due credit. "We're going to
have to come up with a way to defeat that."
"I'll learn to smell them," Ryson stated with determination. "But for now, tell them to
look for thicker than usual clumps in the grass. That's what I'll be doing."
Lief ignored the continued conversation of strategy. After the wizard's display, such
considerations seemed irrelevant. The glowing white light from Enin's web consumed his
thoughts. Such power. If used properly, it would be enough to stop an army of goblins. If
underestimated, it could wipe out the town as well as the landscape before him.
From the tower platform, the elf could also see over the rolling hills to the south and
beyond the Fuge River. Dark Spruce Forest was clear in his sights. He felt the trees call
to him, but he also remembered the pressing need of the algors. He would have to serve
them before returning to the forest.
"Ryson? It is time for us to go," the elf professed lightly.
The delver nodded grimly. A pang of guilt bit at his core. From the tower he could see
the roof of his home, as well as the peaked second story of the Borderline Inn. Was Linda
back at work, worrying about when he'd return? He was already worrying about her. He
made a final request of Sy.
"Keep an eye on Linda for me, would you Sy? I know she can take care of herself, but
it'd make me feel better. Thinking about that shag has me as worried as you."
"Not a problem. I'll see to it, but you keep your mind on yourself. If you're going out
into the desert, you need to stay alert. I can spare you for a few days, but this town needs
you back."
"You needn't fear too much," Lief replied with almost too much confidence for Sy's
liking, but then again the captain of the guard had never met Holli Brances. Lief
explained. "Another elf will be accompanying Ryson and myself, an elf guard. There are
few that can match her talents."
"That's no boast," Ryson echoed. "Holli's going with us."
"Another that was with you at Sanctum?" Sy now understood Lief's confidence. "Very
well. Then all I can say is hurry back."

Once beyond Burbon's wall, Lief took the lead. He and the delver moved on foot,
remaining on the lonely road that passed through the south gate. They passed several hills
before Lief let out a shrill whistle. A similar response came from his left.
Ryson's eyes immediately honed in upon the source. His sharp vision detected trace
hints of Holli's presence while she remained crouched in the tall grass. Upon his sighting,
she stood erect, though carefully and slowly. She checked each direction before stepping
lively but gracefully toward the open road. She met Ryson with a smile.
"Good day to you, delver!"
The near carefree ease in her welcome surprised him. He was prepared for a more
stoic greeting, a greeting that suited a cautious elf guard. Instead, she appeared more than
simply good-humored to see the delver. She seemed almost at peace, and this contrasted
sharply with Ryson's memory of her. Though surprised, he managed to return the hello.
"And a good day to you, Holli. You look well."
And she did, well and happy, and also content with her surroundings, and that also
contrasted with his memories of her. As an elf guard, she had always seemed far from at
ease; always watchful, always preparing for some unseen and unknown threat. But now,
she appeared much more relaxed. Her eyes still darted about, still surveyed the land in all
directions, but not with the same diligence that Ryson remembered.
To the delver, this change was beyond out of character, it was unwarranted, especially
considering the influx of new dangers. Since the release of the magic, he himself was far
more careful. Whenever he was outside the walls of Burbon, his senses jumped to high
alert. He became as zealous in uncovering danger as he remembered the elf guards that
protected their camps in Dark Spruce.
The guard that epitomized this behavior, Holli Brances, was now, however, nothing
like the cautious fox he remembered. He could not guess as to what might have caused
this transformation in her behavior. Ryson's curiosity got the better of him and he blurted
out the question.
"Are you still an elf guard?"
"Of course," she replied simply. She found the question almost humorous. She waited
expectantly for an explanation.
Ryson remained confused. "But you’re different… I don’t know, less alert I guess?"
Holli tilted her head. "I still remain concerned with possible threats, if that's what you
mean. I always will." As if to accent this point, her eyes darted about the landscape.
The quick glance, however, did little to alleviate Ryson's suspicions. Something was
different about the guard and his delver curiosity pushed him to know more. "I don't
know. You seem much more at ease than I remember."
"Right now, I am at ease. I believe that all serious threats have left this area."
Ryson recalled that he encountered the serp and the shag several hilltops to the west.
Could she know of them, were they still about?
"What threats?"
Holli responded with certainty. "A serp, a shag, and some goblins."
"So you know about them?"
"They were within shouting distance a short while ago."
"I know," Ryson admitted. "I broke up the goblins, but the shag and serp forced me
away."
"They have left."
"You're certain?"
"Absolutely."
"How do you know?" Of course, he suspected. He felt a presence around her that was
akin to the aura which surrounded Enin.
"The magic has opened many secrets to those who know how to use it. I can now
sense the presence of such creatures as they approach."
It was as he thought. Holli was much like Enin in her ability to touch the magic. He
wondered how far she had gone with this new power. "So you're casting spells now?"
Holli shook her head, almost defensively. "I am not a magic caster. I am an elf guard,
and my duties prevent me from conducting such activities. Casting spells is a dangerous
activity and requires time for study. I have no such time, and my responsibility to the
safety of those I protect remains paramount. Still, there are other ways to use the magic
other than simply casting spells. It remains an energy that can be harnessed in many
ways."
She appeared certain of this to the extent of knowledgeable. Ryson had little
understanding in the matter of magic, and being a delver, he pressed for answers.
"How so?"
Holli chuckled harmlessly. She understood all too well the delver's curiosity. She
endeavored to quench it for him. "Think of fire. It can be used for heat or for light. Lamps
surround your human town to ward off threats even as pots of stew boil over stoves and
hearths. Magic is no different. It all depends on your need. I don't use spells, but the
magic within me heightens what I can sense. It's not sight or smell, it's beyond that."
Ryson nodded. He made it clear to the guard that he understood her explanation. "I
know. There's a human wizard I've become associated with. He's also learned to sense the
presence of creatures that use magic."
"He casts white magic, with spheres," Lief acknowledged with a nod to Holli.
The elf guard looked back at the walls of Burbon.
Ryson missed the accent of such matters. Instead, he focused on the use of magic
itself. "He's been able to warn us of goblins that sneak through our first line of defense. It
has become quite helpful."
"It will be even more helpful when we cross through the Lacobian desert," Lief stated
with an impatient edge. "The algors await us and need warning. We should not delay."
He began to move southward along the desolate dirt road as Ryson and Holli turned to
follow. A bridge over the Fuge River was in sight as were a few trees of Dark Spruce.
Lief stepped at a quick pace, a near trot for humans. He contemplated the distance to the
forest. Before long they would be able to move among the trees, but only for a while. The
section of forest which separated these grassy hills from the rocky terrain which preceded
the desert was not at all wide. He frowned at the thought of trekking through the rock
canyons and even worse, the Lacobian desert. He grumbled a complaint out loud.
"We should have brought horses."
Ryson corrected him. "It wouldn't have helped. I'm sure you want to climb through the
trees when we reach the forest. What would we do with the horses?"
"I was thinking more of the canyons and the desert."
"They'd help in the canyons, I can't argue that, but not in the desert. I can get enough
water for us, but not for three horses as well. We'd have to bring a great supply of water
for them and that would weigh them down. No, we'll be better off on foot."
Lief's impatience to move on was but a temporary distraction from Ryson's questions
for the elf guard. The delver's thoughts focused back on Holli's words about the magic. If
she could sense creatures that used the energy, she would be as useful as Enin in
uncovering threats. He looked to the river and thought of the river rogues, dangerous
creatures, but creatures that apparently needed magic to walk this land. Again, as they
moved toward the bridge, he voiced his questions.
"Do you sense anything from the river? Any river rogues?"
"No, the path is clear."
"And you sure of this?"
"Absolutely."
This was interesting. If elf guards could indeed detect the presence of other creatures,
it changed battle tactics. He mulled over the possible effects as he voiced yet another
question.
"If you can now sense threats well in advance, doesn't that change everything? I mean,
it sounds like surprise attacks are a thing of the past. Take us moving over this bridge as
an example. If you could sense a river rogue before it gets near us, we could never be
surprised."
"That is exactly why I am more relaxed with our journey at this moment. Do you think
I would allow Lief to walk so carelessly forward if I thought he might be walking into an
ambush?"
Lief grumbled under his breath.
Holli smiled at Ryson. "He is not as attuned to the magic as I am, that is why he is so
irritable."
"So it's different for each elf?"
"Some can not sense anything," Holli replied.
Ryson pondered how that might change things. If some elves were less sensitive than
others, then there was still a chance for surprise. Then again, the proper utilization of
sensitive elves would eliminate this problem. He spoke openly of his theories over such
tactics. "Still, if I understand this correctly, it would remain possible to completely
eliminate surprise attacks. If elves sensitive to magic are used as scouts and guards and
escorts, it would be near impossible for an elf party to fall victim to a raid. To me, that
seems to change things drastically. I mean, why would I rely on stealth if I knew that it
was impossible to move in without being detected. As far as battles go, it almost comes
down now to a point of pure force. Whatever army is the biggest and strongest will win.
Isn't that right?"
"Not exactly." Holli walked with ease in her step, but she still made intermittent
surveys of their surroundings. Her eyes would dart about the hills and across the river as
if she only trusted her new perception to a marked degree. Even as she stepped over the
wooden bridge, she glanced at possible hiding spots for river rogues. No threats existed
but she explained both her actions and her statement. "First, there is a limit to the range.
Yes, I can sense things close by, but an army of goblins may still use stealth to amass
great numbers for an attack. I might sense them before we stumble upon them, but then
again, it may be too late."
"I can understand that," Ryson allowed. "It's the same for the human wizard I told you
about. He can't sense the hills, but he can sense goblins before they reach the wall, so it
isn't a total surprise."
"That may be true," Holli countered, "but there are some threats which can not be
sensed through the magic. Most of these are threats which existed before you destroyed
the sphere. While it's easy to detect the presence of a creature which needs the magic to
exist in the land, like a shag or a serp, it is much more difficult to detect the presence of
others. The dwarves, for example, are the most resistant to magic, thus I would have no
warning of their presence if I simply relied on the perception of magic. It is nearly the
same for the algors. Unlike elves and many humans, the algors don't constantly store
magical energy within themselves. When they cast spells, they must either take it directly
from the air, or spend much time and energy in absorbing the power. Thus, it is difficult
to detect the presence of dwarves and algors based solely on this method. As for humans
and delvers, some are potent with magic while some are resistant. I sense that you would
have the ability to hold much energy within you. You could probably learn to cast many
spells."
"I don't think I want to." Ryson responded almost too quickly.
Holli saw sense in that answer. "Right now, that is probably wise. Casting spells
remains a dangerous activity."
As Ryson considered the point, Lief stepped up to the welcoming cluster of trees that
formed the outer boundary of Dark Spruce Forest. Without reservation, he nimbly
jumped to a branch and waited for Holli and Ryson to join him. The elf guard also took to
the trees, but slightly off to the left so as to spread their formation. Ryson did not join
them.
"Will you not travel the trees with us, delver?" Lief asked. "I recall you handled this
form of travel quite well."
"Thank you, but I think I'll stick to the ground," Ryson responded. He looked about
with grave uncertainty. "I know the forest is home to you, but I've learned it hides many
things now. I'll feel a lot more comfortable on the ground. Besides, I can scout from
down here while Holli uses the advantage of height."
"He's right," Holli stated in agreement. "It's better if we stay spread out."
"As you both wish, I just want to reach the algors as quickly as possible."
Indeed, the three moved quickly through this section of Dark Spruce. The trees were
not clustered or woven tightly together here. They spread themselves apart. They
remained close enough for the elves to step or leap from one to another, but far enough
apart to allow a good deal of sunshine to break through the overhead branches. The
shifting sunbeams bathed the ground with warmth and the forest seemed to welcome
them all. The elves embraced this part of their journey, happy to be leaving the human
town behind.
Their progress slowed only once, to avoid a small party of goblins. Ryson caught their
scent just as Holli sensed the disturbance in the magical aura that surrounded her. It was a
small party, not even enough for a suitable raid, a handful out scavenging for food. The
three virtually ignored the cretins with a wave of disgust. A slight detour served to avoid
hostilities, and elf and delver were soon passing out of Dark Spruce. Much sooner, in
fact, than Lief would have wished, the elves had to give up the trees to step over the rock
hard ground of the sloping canyons.
Here, away from the trees, Holli's regiment of awareness increased. She returned to a
state of wariness which typified the elf guard. The terrain, hilly and rocky, offered cover
for shags and other potential monsters. She looked carefully for such hazards, but the true
threat of this place lied in its proximity to the Lacobian desert.
The Lacobian had become the training ground for the most ambitious wizards and
sorcerers, and there was no telling what terrors might have been created. Throughout
elflore, stories existed of sorcerers summoning terrible creatures. If such creatures were
again brought to this land, they would find this rocky place a welcome hunting ground
and sanctuary. Rumors abounded of both dark and light magic, of spell casting pushed to
the limit, and of monsters not even recorded in the legends or in elflore.
The return of magic and its current use by power hungry novices, brought hard reality
to the land. Had there not been such a span of ages between the disappearance of the
magic and its unavoidable return, perhaps there would remain knowledge of how to use
it. But no such knowledge seemed to exist, and burgeoning wizards were left to depend
on trial and error. Rumors might have spread out of fear and misunderstanding, but they
were born out of disheartening truth, a truth which Holli could not afford to ignore.
With such awareness, the elf guard turned her focus on uncovering all possible
dangers. Uncertain of how the ambitious use of magic might affect her own ability, she
began to divide her reliance over all her senses. Her eyes began to dart along the rugged
rocks with greater diligence. She inspected the ground, searching for the smallest
indication of danger. She listened to the wind with near constant attention, and she began
to rely upon other resources as well. She knew the delver's senses far exceeded her own,
and she called for him to use them.
"Ryson. This place is dangerous. I must ask you to use all your skill to detect anything
which seems out of the ordinary. If you sense anything at all, please advise me."
"Of course."
The coolness of the harvest forest gave way to a harsh, biting southern wind. The
temperature rose as the sight of the Lacobian grew closer. The rocky hills sucked in the
heat like a hungry infant. As their footsteps began to fall on sandy rock and the last traces
of Dark Spruce had long faded behind them, it felt more like the height of the dry season,
as if the coming dormant season was nothing but a distant thought. A wavering haze
formed in the distance, compromising his long range surveillance.
To both his relief and his disappointment, he found nothing in these canyons, only the
day old tracks of a shag. He pointed the tracks out to Holli and she nearly dismissed them
completely. At Ryson's urgings, they circumvented a bluff he believed might hold its lair,
but the elf guard appeared more concerned with distant, uncovered threats than the
existence of a shag.
Ryson knew exactly where he needed to lead them; the sandstone mountain that the
algors used as a meeting place. He had made this trek before, and once a delver
discovered a path, it was never forgotten. He could have led them to the sandstone edifice
blindfolded, moving solely on memory of a trip taken over a season ago, but instead, he
remained watchful.
In his travels, the delver had hoped he might find signs of a few wayward algors. He
recalled how individuals would break from the community and set off in the desert alone,
isolating themselves in order to find their individual identity. All algors needed to be
warned of the impending attack of the dwarves, and Ryson was well aware of the way
they freely shared information. If he could find a straggler here and there, it would only
help their cause. With each algor told, the warning would spread that much more quickly.
He looked for tracks of such algors, solitary travelers hoping in some mad fashion to find
their own individualism in the lonely desert, but he found nothing. Not unexpected. The
algors lived at the heart of the desert, surrounded completely by the hot, shifting sand. It
would probably take time to reach a point where they might actually find signs of a single
traveler.
Ryson looked to the sky. The sun was low in the western horizon and there was still a
great distance to travel. He considered their surroundings and their circumstances. He
knew enough of the desert not to be fooled by the current warmth. When the sun dropped
beyond the horizon, the air would grow cold. There would be a need for shelter, probably
even a fire. The rocky canyons, unfortunately, were now almost completely out of sight.
If they were to camp now, they would have to do so among a group of cacti in the sand,
not the best shelter in the land, but it would have to do.
As he scoured the landscape for the best site available, he wondered if Lief and Holli
would even allow making camp. They might urge him to move onward through the night.
If such was their wish, he would certainly be able to continue. The desert was taking a
greater toll upon the elves than it was upon him. In fact, he would have rather kept
moving. Still, he had to offer the proposal.
He was about to make his proposition when slightly shifting sand stole his attention.
He looked to his companions to call out a warning. Holli's attention was also fixed upon
the disturbance. Lief, for the moment, was not yet aware, but the delver's call brought
him to the ready.
"The sand's moving."
"I see it," Holli whispered. "Spread out!"
Both Lief and Ryson obeyed. They formed three points of a triangle around the
section of disturbed sand. All movement stopped. Even the sand settled back into place.
Holli stood motionless, closest to the point of their focus.
Ryson whispered another warning. "There's still movement down there. I can feel it."
"What kind of movement?"
"Hard to say. Tunneling maybe. But whatever it is, there's more than one. I think
maybe a dozen different sources."
"How close to the surface?"
"Not very. Do you think it's goblins?"
"Doubtful."
Ryson thought of the magic, how when it was first released from the sphere it mutated
and created terrible monsters. Anything at all could be waiting down there preparing to
attack. He posed the possibility in one word to Holli.
"Magic?"
"I sense nothing."
"Wait, I hear something. Voices. They're coming up."
"Swords!" Holli ordered and all three drew their weapons.
Ryson's sword, the Sword of Decree, revealed its enchantment as it magnified the
dying sunlight. The glow drenched the sand before them. The white sand sparkled as it
again began to shift, this time with far greater force, and the increased light served to
magnify the disturbance. Large amounts of sand swirled downward, as if falling through
an hour glass. A crater formed as more and more of the sand began to fall away into some
unseen hole.
Ryson looked deep into the heart of the gyrating disorder. Like a swirling whirlpool,
the sand churned faster as it neared the center of the crater. The delver could only wonder
as to how much sand would disappear into this ever-widening chasm.
In a mere instant, Ryson saw that it was not natural forces that had opened the hole,
but the greatest miners in all the land. The whirlpool effect was broken as a growling
dwarf shattered the surface.
Sand sailed in every direction even as it continued to spill downward into an ever
widening expanse. The first dwarf jumped clear, then another, and another. They bustled
up from the sand like angry ants ready for war. Armored chest plates sparkled as richly as
the desert sand. Reinforced with jewels, this armor could not be cut by elf swords.
Though prepared to strike, for their axes were in their stout, firm hands, the first dwarves
to appear revealed surprise in seeing the elves and the delver.
Other dwarves surfaced. Ten in number now stood upon the surface of the sand. They
wore goggles made of tinted gems to protect their vision from the desert light, but their
eyes widened at the unexpected sight of the elves.
The shock spread. Lief fumbled with his words. "What is going on here?"
The dwarves said nothing. They had expected to attack algors. They crouched in battle
readiness, but they held their position.
Holli saw the situation clearly. She held tight to her sword, but dropped it from its
ready position. "They thought we were algors. Isn't that true?"
The dwarves did not feel the need to explain such things to an elf. They might have
simply retreated back down their tunnel, had one not voiced a single suspicion.
"Spies."
"Nonsense," Holli responded firmly.
The accusing dwarf did not think so. "Why else would they be out here? An alliance
with the algors."
Nothing more was needed. The situation quickly boiled over. The dwarves advanced,
considering the three as enemies.
"Fire upon you fools!" Lief admonished the attackers. "You have no cause for this."
The dwarves ignored him. They broke into three separate groups, each to deal with an
individual enemy. Two groups of three set upon Holli and Ryson while a foursome
moved to surround Lief. They moved laboriously, struggling with the shifting sand at
their feet. They plodded forward without speed or dexterity. Each step was forced, as if
each movement had to be considered separately.
Lief and Holli also grappled with the terrain, but not to the same degree. Their bodies
were slight, lean and long. They remained able to leap and side-step, whereas the
dwarves sank deep into the soft footing like lead weights. Still, the elves were at ground
level and in close quarters, not an enviable position when battling dwarves.
The dwarves took this to heart and believed that their superior numbers and strength
would lead them to easy victory despite the shifting sand beneath them. They swung their
axes almost wildly. Their short arms allowed only a limited reach and they were unable
to connect, but they could see the elves tiring quickly under the heat of the desert. Those
that focused on Holli and Lief became near ferocious in their attacks.
For those that attacked the delver, they found quick frustration. The delver moved
with ease over the sand, moved with such speed and precision the dwarves were left
swinging and grasping at open air. Ryson dodged each attack as if he were a dry leaf in
the heart of a tornado. The dwarves soon lost all perspective of direction, and then, all
hope.
Ryson would not use his sword upon the dwarves, but he would not let them callously
attack him or his friends. He focused his attack on the dwarves' goggles. In a blur of
motion, his agile hand speared toward the face of each attacker. He ripped the protective
glasses away and exposed the dwarf eyes to the bright desert sun. With each assault, a
dwarf was rendered near helpless as they jammed their eyelids shut to block the burning
light that was magnified by his sword.
After blinding those that attacked him, he turned his attention on assisting the elves.
He darted across the sand like a hurricane, his gleaming sword a streak of lightning. He
continued his assault, relieving each dwarf of his goggles.
The dwarves could not fight him. With or without their glasses, they could not see
him. They could not stop him. Their axe blades sliced harmlessly through the air. In the
end, the lot of them were left shielding their eyes with their hands and unable to strike.
In frustration, humiliation, one called for an immediate retreat. None argued. They
dove for the darkness of the hole without hesitation.
Lief appeared willing to stop them or to follow, but Holli's command held him.
"Let them go. We can't stop all of them and prisoners will only slow us."
Lief's anger burned. He yelled into the entrance of the tunnel. "Attack us will you?
You had no cause. Fire upon you! Fire upon Yave!" He kicked sand into the opening as if
to lash out with one last insult.
Ryson looked to Holli. "They've already started their attacks," he stated grimly.
"Hard to know the extent," she responded simply as if measuring the weight of the
dwarf battle party.
"I noticed traces of blood on their axes. They must have already inflicted casualties,"
Ryson pointed out.
"Yes, but we do not know how many."
"One is too many."
Holli voiced simple logic. "We can't undo what has already occurred."
"But we can do all we can to prevent more," Ryson pressed.
"That's why we're here."
"I was going to ask if you wanted to make camp, but I can't recommend that now,"
Ryson stated almost harshly. "We have to reach the sandstone mountain as soon as
possible."
"I agree."
Nothing more was said.
Lief gave one last angry glance into the dwarf tunnel. Even now the opening was
fading from sight, the sand shifting to cover the hole. It turned first into a depression,
then the wind swept away even this last trace. Ryson ignored the change. He moved
forward, leading the two elves as quickly as possible to the place where he knew he
would find the algors.

Two goblins perched themselves high upon a hilltop due west of Burbon. They
watched two figures exit the south gate of the human outpost, two which were quickly
joined by a third. One they recognized immediately; the delver. The newcomers were
unknown to them. The diminutive monsters waited near breathless, standing motionless
in the high grass. They knew of the great senses of the cursed delver. And though he
remained a great distance away from their position, they feared the scout might spot them
if they made the slightest disturbance. Their interest grew as the delver and his
companions crossed the Fuge River. As the range between the two groups increased, one
of the goblins found the courage to speak, though in a whisper so as not to alert those
they watched.
"They cross the river."
"I see," the second muttered in a low guttural voice.
"They move to the trees."
The second did not respond. It merely watched carefully, its eyes widening. The thick,
puffy skin that surrounded its face appeared to bulge. When it saw Lief and Holli leap to
the trees, it spit, and finally spoke with even greater harshness.
"He is with elves! We must report this."
The two goblins turned and descended the hill, trounced through the tall grass with
vehemence. The two small evils cursed as they bereaved the thick hill brush of its very
existence. They moved northwest, away from the river, away from Burbon.
One moaned an unintelligible sound as they moved upon the base of an
indistinguishable hill. They stepped up to a hidden path that led to a cave entrance. They
moved forward, past a goblin guard, and began descending a long tunnel.
Again, the eyes of the goblins widened. The thick rubbery skin that swelled at their
cheeks and around their eyes sagged. The thin wispy gray hair that topped their heads
shuddered in the breeze of the tunnel, typifying their own feelings of dread as they
entered this godless place.
Lunacy. For two goblins to enter this den willingly, it bordered on something beyond
insanity. This was a shag's lair, the tunnel carved out by the massive, powerful paws of a
monster that consumed goblins as appetizers. However, this shag, a giant shag, was now
supposedly on their side, an ally under the same commander, and the master now used
this sanctuary as its own home.
Each goblin tried to ignore the claw marks on the sides of the tunnel, but their
apprehensive glances were impossible to deny. Their steps, labored at first, faltered as
they closed upon a hollowed area large enough to fit a small goblin platoon. The smell of
death was overpowering as the shag came into view. The monster glared at the goblins,
but made no move.
The goblins froze.
The leader of both reclined upon the skin of a river rogue, a testament to the shag's
strength and hunting prowess. A shag that was large enough to prey upon river rogues
was indeed a powerful and dangerous creature, a threat to all except the serp that could
control it.
The serp stirred from his rest. He had named himself Sazar, after an ancient leader, a
chieftain from the legends. Sazar ignored the shag. The goblins could never discern if this
was confidence in his own ability to control the monster, or brazen stupidity. He focused
upon the goblins. He took long moments to analyze the cretins. He looked beyond their
fear of the shag, beyond their panic of standing in its lair. He saw their confusion. They
had left their post. They would not do so unless they had something important to report.
He looked deep into their chaotic, twisted minds. He could almost see what they had
seen. One word became very clear to him.
"Elves." The word sprung from the serp in a soft, soothing tone.
The goblins would not dare to question their master, but they stood in awe at the
revelation. Both began to speak almost simultaneously about the incident.
"Yes, elves. They left with the delver, the one that attacked us," one clamored.
The other continued. "They crossed the river together. They entered the forest."
Sazar held up a hand ordering silence. The goblins obeyed without dissent and Sazar
began to ask quick, pointed questions without interruption.
"Did they appear to explore the lands as they traveled?"
"No." Both goblins responded instantly.
"Did the elves take to the trees?"
"Yes, that is how we knew they were elves."
"Was anyone else with them, did any humans follow?"
"Not that we saw. No one came through the gates."
The serp again searched the minds of the goblins, reached in to find any shred of
doubt in their own answers. There was none.
"So they were not on a scouting mission, and they were obviously ready to travel deep
into the forest. Unless they planned to meet more elves in the trees, they planned to go
alone. No human could keep up with elves or a delver in Dark Spruce. Hmmmm…two
elves and the only delver in Burbon making a trip into Dark Spruce. Interesting."
The serp looked into the small fire that provided the only light in this cave. His snakelike eyes followed the smoke that drifted up through the air vent above it. The smoke
would never be seen from the outside, for the serp used thick handfuls of shag hair to act
as filters throughout the vent, a vent which twisted and turned and opened upon the
backside of the hill. His thoughts danced with the flames. He spoke openly of them. The
bitter cold of his dark soul was hidden by the warm soothing tone of his voice.
"So the delver has left, left with two elves. Why would he leave? He is the only delver
in Burbon, and he knows we are here. It must be important for him, otherwise he would
wait. And why would he leave with elves? Elves and humans remain apart. These are the
first elves to come to Burbon since the release of the magic. What would the elves want
with humans? Ah, but I forget myself. They did not leave with humans, they left with a
delver. The very same delver that was at Sanctum. That is fact. There were elves at
Sanctum. There must be a connection, an important connection if this delver would leave
while a threat exists."
"Will we attack tonight?" one of the goblins blurted out. It did not understand the
serp's questions, it only knew the importance of Ryson's departure. "If the delver is gone,
it is an opportunity."
Sazar turned his curiosity on the goblin. He almost laughed. "What kind of
opportunity?" he pressed with mischievous delight.
The goblin immediately wished it had remained silent. Goblins found it difficult to
talk to serps, they stood like hypnotized birds before a king cobra. It stuttered as it tried to
explain. "The delver will not be able to scout, there will be no warning."
"He has already uncovered us. Don't you think he has informed the human guard?
Don't you think the guard will be that much more careful while he is gone?"
The goblin uneasily looked at the ground.
Again, the serp laughed. "Do you really think we could just walk through the gates
because the delver has left? The delver has already done his job, of that I'm sure. The
humans have been warned. To attack now would be nothing less than stupidity."
The goblin's shoulder's drooped as it shied from the serp's words.
Sazar remained good-humored, though sharp-tongued. His tone heightened with
giddiness as it swept an ever-widening hold upon the goblin's will. "See what happens
when you think for yourself? You would walk into an open pit in broad daylight if it
wasn't for my guidance. The time to attack is not when the delver is away, but when the
delver first returns. That may be an opportune time. The humans will drop their own
guard, thinking the delver's return would add to their safety. That is a time of
vulnerability. However, that is certainly not our main concern at this time. We must first
understand what is actually happening."
Sazar turned away from the goblins and again looked into the fire. "If those are elves
from Sanctum, why would they come back for the delver? Ingar was defeated, the sphere
destroyed. According to what I know, representatives from each of the five races entered
Sanctum, so it may not end with the delver and the elves. Dwarves were at Sanctum,
algors were there, even a cliff behemoth. Why would they want or need to meet again?
Maybe an alliance, but then why would they not bring a human with them?"
The serp shook his head. His long tail drifted gently across the river rogues skin.
Again, he asked the most perplexing question aloud. "What could be so important to
make the only delver of Burbon leave so quickly after uncovering us? That is what I need
to know. That is very important information."
He first eyed the shag with the thought of having it follow the threesome. He quickly
reconsidered. Even a shag would not keep pace with a delver and two elves through the
forest, and they already had a head start. He turned his attention to the goblins.
"Return to your posts for now. Watch the forest as well as the walls of Burbon. I wish
to be alerted if and when the delver returns. I will send you relief before the sun sets."
The goblins gladly turned and near galloped free from the tunnel, leaving the serp
alone with the shag. Sazar folded his hands against his scaly chest. His sharp claws
tapped a rhythmic beat against his own thick hide.
The shag fell into a daze, mesmerized by the gentle clicking which echoed through its
lair.

"There's something going on up there," Ryson stated with an edge of concern to his
voice.
They had traveled far into the Lacobian. The sun was already climbing high in the sky.
The desert heat returned quickly, just as the sight of the sandstone mountain came into
their view. Though it stood a distance away, shimmering above the desert sand, they
would reach the algor meeting place before noon time.
Just past dawn, Ryson had wondered, even voiced the possibility to his companions, if
they might find any algors within the monument. He had not found a trace of a single
algor through their entire journey. He had believed he would find many trails once they
closed upon the sandstone ridge with its many cave entrances. Yet, first to his
disappointment, then to his dismay, he found nothing but the wind blown sand. The
possibility that the edifice was now abandoned grew stronger with every step, grew until
he tasted the blowing grit of sand in the air.
Holli tensed with preparedness for any calamity as she demanded greater explanation.
"What is it you sense?"
"There's a lot of sand in the air, more than there should be given the amount of wind."
"What could be the source?"
"I'm not sure, but I can tell you what it's not. It's not just a few algors stepping off into
the desert. There's just too much sand in the air." Ryson ceased speaking as he stopped all
forward movement. His eyes narrowed, focusing upon a point distant on the horizon. His
arm jutted forward, his finger pointed out like a dagger. "Over there. Just to the right of
the cliff face. Between those two dunes. There's a cloud of sand spreading in the air."
Holli and Lief peered into the distance. They found the spot defined by the delver, but
saw nothing. The sand was too fine in the shimmering heat for them to discern it from the
surrounding dunes.
The delver, however, was quite sure of what he saw. "The disturbance isn't recent, but
it was definitely caused this morning."
"It is beyond my sight," Holli admitted without shame. Elf eyes were sharp but could
not compare to those of a purebred delver. "What do you make of it?"
"A slowly spreading cloud of settling sand. There's not much of it left in the air, only a
trace really." He bent down and grabbed a handful of sand from the desert at his feet. He
threw it into the air and watched carefully. The majority of the abrasive substance fell to
the ground. Smaller grains were gently swept away by the hot breeze. The dust, however,
floated lazily in the air. At the beginning, it was well concentrated, a tightly defined cloud
of minute sand particles. It spread slowly, altered by wind and gravity, but it remained in
the air and visible even after several moments.
"That was just a handful," Ryson stated as his eyes shot back and forth from the cloud
in front of him to the one in the distance. "Whatever caused the one by the cliff, it had to
be big."
Holli wanted greater detail. "Big like what?"
"Maybe like fifty galloping horses, maybe a hundred," Ryson stated flatly.
"A galloping horse would not last very long in this heat," Holli noted.
"That's true, but for the algors to have caused this, there would have to have been a lot
of them, and dancing around or something."
"What about a battle?"
Ryson remembered their own encounter with the dwarves. "You think maybe the
dwarves have already attacked?"
Holli nodded. "It is a possibility."
"It would have had to have been a large skirmish."
Lief looked to Holli. "Jon knew about their meeting place. If he revealed that to Yave
when he explained the circumstance surrounding Tun's death, she would know about it as
well. That would definitely be her first target. She would probably send a great force of
dwarves to attack."
Ryson gulped back a growing sense of dread that manifested itself as a lump in his
throat. He struggled to remain optimistic. "Now, hold on. Why would such a battle
between the dwarves and the algors take place so far from the monument? Don't you
think the algors would have stayed in the mountain, protected their home? It doesn't make
sense that they would go off into the open sand to fight the dwarves."
"The algors are better suited to fight in the open upon the sand," Holli reminded the
delver. "They fight with slings. They are used to the shifting sand, where the dwarves are
not. If I had an army of algors, I would certainly prefer to fight in the open than in the
caves of their sandstone mountain. Especially if they were attacked by dwarves. The
dwarves would hold a great advantage in the caves, fighting in an element they would
consider home."
Ryson still would not accept the theory. "But how would the algors have known that
the dwarves meant to attack? How would they have had a chance to get to the clearing?
We haven't warned them yet."
"Word spreads quickly from algor to algor," Holli allowed.
Ryson again thought of their own encounter with the dwarves. The war party jumped
through the sand. Perhaps the dwarves did not know of the meeting place, perhaps they
attacked a few stragglers just outside of the cliff face and the algors dashed out to meet
the antagonists. It held merit, but he would not know for sure until he could better inspect
the actual area of disturbance.
"We won't know what happened until I get a closer look at that area of sand," he
stated. "I want to get over there as quickly as possible, but I don't want to fall upon an
ambush or alarm any algors that may be around. How do we handle this?"
Holli looked directly at the sandstone edifice. "We go to the mountain first. We call to
the algors and give our warning. That is why we're here. I hope that we will find an algor,
or several algors, that might help with an explanation. We will tend to the disturbance
after we carry out our primary mission."
Lief and Ryson did not argue. The delver began a quick trot in the direction of the
edifice, and the two elves followed briskly. As he glided over the sandy dunes, Ryson
kept a careful eye upon the ground in front of him. He watched diligently for any signs of
a dwarf ambush. He also took quick glimpses of the slowly dispersing sand cloud to his
right. There was no sign of any further movement. If a battle had been fought there, it
was long since over.
The three quickly closed upon the cliff face of the sandstone mountain. As the cave
entrances grew more defined with their proximity, Ryson's distress leaped. Immediately,
he noticed the fresh trails of hundreds of algors. He said nothing to his companions, but
his quickened pace spoke volumes of his anxiety.
The elves struggled to keep up. Just as Holli was about to call for the delver to slow,
Ryson came to an abrupt halt. Each elf breathed heavily the hot, dry air as they waited
impatiently for an explanation.
Ryson said nothing at first, his attention squarely fixed upon the sand in front of him.
His eyes scanned the trails which moved away from the rock and over the dunes. He
counted under his breath, staggered by the signs of so many.
He dropped to his knees as he inspected several sets of algor footprints. The claw
marks and the wide-spread sole imprints were easily distinguishable in the soft sand.
Ryson measured the depth of several prints.
"They were carrying something. Something heavy." He got to his feet and looked
directly toward Holli. "The trails lead directly to the sand cloud over there. There aren't
any fresh trails coming back."
"Any other markings?"
"If you mean dwarf trails, no. The only thing around is algor prints." Ryson paused to
look up at the edifice before him. He shook his head. "I don't think there's anybody left
up there."
"Can you be certain?"
"No."
"Should we call to them?" Lief asked tensely.
"I don't know if we should," Ryson responded with caution. "If there are any of them
left up there, they're probably going to be cautions about strangers. We don't know what
happened here."
Holli's grim expression revealed much of her own dread, expressed more than her
simple reply. "Our priorities have now changed. Let us answer what has happened here
first. Follow the trails."
Ryson did so eagerly. He moved carefully toward the lingering dust cloud. He said
little, only enough to instruct Holli what he found.
"The trails form stringent lines, they marched in rigid formation. It's hard to tell
exactly how many of them were marching this way. At least over two hundred, but
maybe five times that much."
Holli looked back to the sandstone ridge. "How many do you think the mountain
could hold?"
"Impossible to say. I know very little about how they live, how many per cave, what
they might consider cramped. It's also difficult to say how deep the caves go into the
rock. If you forced me to guess, I'd say … wait a minute!"
The elves stopped, stood dead still.
The delver sniffed the air, put an ear to the wind. "They're still there." But his voice
was a mixture of confusion and certainty. "I can hear them. There's no battle, they're
alive, but they're crying, wailing. What's going on?"
The delver wanted an answer, and he wanted it now. He took off in a dash, quickly
outdistancing the two elves.
Lief cursed under his breath as he and Holli sprinted to catch up. They followed in his
wake, fighting the heat and the shifting sand. They lost sight of him over the first dune.
As they topped it, they caught his blurred movement quickly passing over the next.
Again, Lief cursed.
"Why does he do this?"
"It is what he is," Holli responded without slowing.
As the elves reached the top of the second dune, they did not expect to see the delver,
only his trail in the sand which he did not bother to hide. To their surprise, Ryson stood in
their view, stopped upon the peak of a third dune and looking down upon a valley of sand
before him.
The elves fought against the desert slopes that separated them from their friend. They
plunged forward, saying nothing, their feet slipping over loose granules. They reached
the side of the delver only to join him in viewing a sorrowful sight.
Thousands of algors circled a large open pit, stood hand in hand grieving. Well over
another thousand algor bodies rested lifeless and still at the bottom of the pit. The dead
were not covered, and large jagged wounds were grossly apparent. No blood dripped
from the gashes, only a thick ooze glistened in the sun. The three stared down upon the
sight with marked sadness as well as disbelief etching their expressions.
Ryson's voice cracked with emotion. "So many, so many dead! Look at the wounds!
They were attacked, slaughtered."
Lief spoke with gray gloom. "The dwarves. They must have found the meeting place.
Fire upon them all." The last was spoken without angry emotion, but with grievous
regret.
Holli, though moved by the sight, called upon her guard training. She placed the facts
together, ordered the events in likely fashion.
"They are indeed axe and mace wounds. I doubt the algors even knew what hit them.
They were attacked in their mountain, not in the open. I'm sure that's where we'll find the
signs of battle. The sand cloud that you saw was the result of excavating the burial site.
They carried the bodies from the mountain. The lines you spoke of were a funeral
march."
"The bodies. That's what weighed them down." Ryson could stand the sight no longer.
He swung his head away, took a few steps, and dropped to the seat of his pants.
"Should we let them know we're here?" Lief asked of Holli.
"They already know," Ryson mumbled. "They saw me when I climbed up here. They
didn't move. They just stood there wailing, ignoring me."
Holli frowned. "We came here to tell them the dwarves wished to attack them. That,
they now know. But I wouldn't suggest we leave until we get a chance to tell them of all
we understand. They must be told of Yave's actions. They must be told why so many
were killed. I doubt it will help ease their grief. I have no idea how long their ceremony
will last. I can only suggest we go back to their caves and wait for them to return to the
mountain. Hopefully, they will hear what we have to say."
Holli walked slowly back in the direction of the sandstone mountain. Lief followed,
but Ryson ignored them both. Still sitting in the sand, his senses fought for reason in the
scene he had witnessed. The wailing of the algors streamed into his ears, bit into his skin.
His fingers clenched about handfuls of sand. Confusion, grief, anger; all of it flooded his
consciousness. The sight of the pit haunted him, remained clear in his mind no matter
how hard he fought off the image. Death, not of one or even a handful, but death in grand
design as if the reaper himself had swooned down and his black spirit engulfed them like
a low cloud, that was the image of his horror. Three comrades had died in his presence at
Sanctum, but never, never before had he witnessed death on such an immense scale. He
couldn't just walk away.
He staggered to his feet. He turned to face the algors, looked into the heart of the
burial pit. Though the algors were not his own; not his family, not even his race; he hurt.
Pain exploded in his chest. A thickness filled his head, beyond tragedy, beyond horror. It
was not the twisted mutilated shape of the dead. It was the loss, a loss he felt as deeply as
any algor. How could the soul feel so empty, yet hurt so much at the same time? He
wished to release his pain. Ryson did not even consider if the algors would have him. He
simply trudged down the side of the dune to the edge of the pit. He stepped up to the ring
of algors that stood hand-in-hand.
Without a word, without any other acknowledgment of his presence, the circle opened
for him, opened as if he was simply another algor. Two algors broke hands and stepped
aside, offered a space for the Ryson to enter, an invitation for the delver to join the circle.
Ryson took a small step forward, took the hands of the algors, and completed the
circle once more. At that moment, he was both one with the algors, as well as separated
from them. He felt the sense of belonging to their community, just as he felt that which
made him different. In that same instant, he understood what it was like to be an algor, a
race that constantly struggled to seek individualism in a community bound as a whole. He
looked into the pit and saw the loss in a new light, the loss to the community. The
pressure in his head doubled, tripled, and forced the unyielding release of tears. He
wailed with the algors. Screamed until his voice was nothing more than a grumble and his
throat was raw.
For one of the few times in his life, the delver lost track of both his surroundings and
of time. No pressing desire to explore the land tempted his spirit. He simply stood with
the algors crying, exhausting his grief. He held nothing back, he released it all.
The algors began pushing sand from piles into the pit. They worked in a fashion which
typified their struggle between acting together and acting alone. At times they moved in
orchestrated flows, moving like a single arm directed by one mind. Other times, their
coordination broke down. They appeared more like angry bees flying in every direction.
As the algors finished the burial, Ryson realized that they had not yet released all their
emotion. Though they had discharged their grief, they held to their anger, anger out of
their community being viciously attacked. And though they welcomed the delver into
their ceremony, they now ignored him. The algors filed away, passing the delver with
disregard.
Ryson looked to the sand, looked upon the burial site. There were no markers left
behind, no list of names of the dead. The desert had swallowed the bodies and soon a hot
wind would remove all traces, all signs of the burial. It was not the algor way to leave
remembrances for their fallen, for their dead, but Ryson could not bring himself to simply
walk away from the empty sand.
He reached into his pouch and pulled out his dagger. He plunged it into the sand. It
looked out of place, a weapon on top of a burial mound for hundreds. He thought of
picking it up. He knew the desert would swallow this as well before the end of the day, it
would fail as a marker. He bent over, but his hand stopped before his fingers could clasp
the handle. He would leave it behind, a marker for his own memories, a marker that a
delver had stood with the algors and understood their grief.
Ryson quickly returned to the sandstone mountain, only to find the algors circling the
elves with angry shouts. They were not listening to Holli's call for calm or even Lief's
curses. Most were not even listening to themselves. They simply shouted out threats,
insults, and accusations.
"The elves are allied with the dwarves!"
"These are but more spies!"
"Send them away!"
"Take them prisoner."
Ryson tried to make his way through the mass of algors to the elves, but they blocked
his path. Otherwise, the algors ignored him. They heaped their fury upon the elves. The
delver meant nothing to them. He was able to use his speed and agility to pass through
much of the mob, but there were so many. The circles of algors grew tighter as he closed
upon the elves and it became near impossible to pass unless he climbed over them. He
considered it.
The algors continued their harangue.
"Elves have no business here."
"We have work to do, the magic must be collected."
"The dwarves will pay, as will all those that help them."
Ryson could hear Holli try to speak over the crowd.
"We do not help the dwarves, we came to warn you." Her emotions remained in
control even as the algors completely dismissed her statement.
"It is too late for warnings."
"Warn the dwarves. Let them know they will pay."
Ryson was not sure what that meant, but one thing was perfectly clear, the algors were
not in the mood for listening. The group consensus was fed out of anger and hostility and
it seemed each algor fed on the passion.
In the face of such angry disarray, Ryson opted for the dramatic. With a swift pull, he
unsheathed his sword. It burned like the sun. The light bathed over the algors, covered
them like sheets of rain. He made no threatening gestures. He simply held the blade well
over his head, pointing straight to the heavens.
The algors ceased their din. They turned away from the elves as their voices spoke in
unison. A thousand algors speaking with one voice, speaking the name of a delver that
had joined those of the legends.
"Ryson Acumen."
The name crashed out over the desert as it was spoke with reverence and intimacy.
A single algor voice followed the chorus. "It is indeed the delver Acumen."
Ryson turned upon the voice as the speaker stepped through the intertwined mass. It
was an algor the delver recognized.
"You were one of the ten," Ryson stated with certainty. "You traveled to Sanctum
with us. You didn't enter the mountain. You were one of the eight that waited outside."
"You did not select me," the algor said plainly.
A twinge of guilt bit into Ryson. "I didn't know who to pick. I just picked two at
random."
"You picked on faith," the algor corrected. "Why are you here?"
The need for the sword was gone, and Ryson returned it to its sheath. The algors
listened intently to his response.
The purpose of Ryson's journey was now near irrelevant. Still, he spoke with open
honesty over his intentions. "We came to warn you the dwarves wanted to attack. In
truth, it was the elves that came to me. They pointed out that you needed to be warned. I
realize that we are late, and you don't know how sorry I am."
The single algor spoke eloquently. "We would never doubt the word of Ryson
Acumen. If the elves wished to do us this service, we shall not repay them with hostility."
Holli and Lief made their way through the crowd of algors. They stood at Ryson's
side. The elf guard desired more information.
"What exactly happened here? I realize the dwarves attacked you, but how? How did
the battle progress? Why were your casualties so great?"
"The dwarves attacked viciously," the algor responded. "They tunneled into our
mountain from below. We were not armed, we were not ready. They moved from one
tunnel to another, killing everything in their path. There were no warnings, only
confusion. Those of us that survived did so only because we slept in tunnels the dwarves
did not locate or because we were out of the mountain completely. The dwarves appeared
ready to destroy the mountain completely, but the large number of tunnels forced them to
separate. Their troops were disjointed and unorganized. They had to regroup back
underground. We have not seen them again. We don't know if they'll be back because we
don't know why we were attacked."
Lief turned his attention to all the algors, giving sweeping glances across the crowd.
"What has happened here is an injustice, a misguided act of revenge. It seems Yave
Folarok of Dunop blames the algors for the death of her son, Tun. King Bol has banished
himself from Dunop and Yave has taken control. I know this does not ease your loss, but
this is why you were attacked. I'm sorry."
The algors erupted, the silence blasted away by their calls.
"Be sorry for the dwarves."
"The dwarves shall be sorry."
"Sorry they dared to attack us."
More shouts rang out, but many of the algors began to climb the sandstone cliff face
and disappear into the many caves. The numbers around the elves and Ryson dwindled,
but their resolution was no less evident.
Ryson's eyes bore into the algor in front of him. "What are you going to do?"
"War had been declared," the algor said simply. "We shall respond. We will create an
army of sand giants and send them to Dunop. The sand giants will use the very tunnels
dug by the dwarves that attacked us. The tunnels will lead them directly to Dunop. If the
dwarves try to collapse them, the giants will break through. The sand giants will destroy
Dunop and every dwarf that comes in their path."
The algor said nothing more, simply walked past Ryson and followed the others back
to the caves. Within moments, the two elves and the delver were left alone, standing in
front of the sandstone edifice with even greater dread than when they had begun their
trip.

"They were only a support party, ten commandos setting up a listening post. They
noted movement on the surface. They thought they might have come across some
wayward algors. When they broke through the surface, they came upon two elves and
what they believe was a delver. He moved too quickly to be a human."
Strog Grandhammer, the newly appointed War Com - military strategist of the
separatist dwarves now in command of the dwarf army - continued his unsettling report
to Queen Yave.
"Our troops were not prepared for battle, at least not with a delver. He moved quickly
enough in the open to remove their protective goggles. The desert sand impaired their
vision. They retreated."
"Retreat?" Yave's question shot from her lips like a poison dart.
Strog replied firmly. "A tactical decision I completely agree with. Blind dwarves can
not fight successfully against a delver and two elves, especially in the open sand. We
suffered no casualties in this skirmish and we have learned much."
"What have you learned?" Yave scoffed at Strog's embrace of such incompetence. Her
question sounded more of a dare than a request.
"The delver had a glowing sword," Strog sneered. Her venomous stare was not lost
upon the War Com. How dare she question his tactical appraisal? How long would he
have to put up with her ignorance, her incompetence? She was important to the
separatists for now. The dwarves of Dunop accepted her as royalty. But soon, very soon,
the separatists would do away with that need as well, just as they had done away with the
need for the elves. Strog spoke with a challenging tone, a tone which revealed his
growing impatience. "I guess I don't have to tell you of the importance of this. And
before you even think to ask, there is no doubt. The sword magnified the light of the
desert. There is no doubt of its enchantment, and no doubt as to who holds it."
"The delver from Sanctum?" Yave's expression revealed equal portions of shock and
anger.
The War Com needled her emotions. "I know of no other delver with a glowing
sword. It must be Ryson Acumen. The very same delver that accompanied Tun and Jon
into Sanctum, the delver that destroyed Ingar's sphere and released the magic."
Yave seethed. She stamped her feet as her anger prohibited her from answering.
Strog pressed, taking enjoyment from Yave's outburst of temper. "Based on the report,
it is likely the elves were also the very same elves that entered Sanctum as well. They fit
the description of Lief Woodson and Holli Brances. What other elves would be
accompanying Ryson Acumen into the desert?"
Yave managed to spit out one word. "Where?"
Strog pulled a roughly drawn map off a stone table. He examined it slowly, for no
other reason than to make Yave wait. He feigned expressions of concentration as he
glanced across several portions of the parchment. He knew exactly where the skirmish
took place, but he knew the extended pause would agitate Yave even further. Finally, he
folded the map over once, then again. He handed the squared parchment to the queen,
pointing to the exact location of the minor battle.
"There," he pronounced. "In the desert, far from Dark Spruce, far from any human
town. They must have passed through the rock canyons as they were forging further into
the desert. In truth, my troops only chanced upon them. In order to track algor
movements, it is essential I have tunnel sentries spread in a perimeter around possible
algor travel routes. To the algors, the entire desert is a potential access way. I ordered
many listening posts in many places. We were lucky to find them."
"Lucky?! Your troops were defeated." Yave was unimpressed with his strategies, only
incensed at his failure.
The War Com curled his lip. He stared silently at the queen.
Yave saw the challenge of his gaze. She exploded. "Did your warriors kill the elves or
the delver?! Did they take them prisoner? No! They scurried away like scared mice."
Strog's eyes narrowed, but still he said nothing.
Yave threw a goblet across the room. Clear water, mountain water that was funneled
underground through falls and aqueducts filtered by tons of shale and rock, scattered
across the wall. The goblet, made of gold and nickel, suffered a dent as it clanked noisily
against the wall and then the floor. The metallic clang echoed throughout the throne
room, yet Yave's voice overcame the vibration.
"Just don't stand there! Say something."
Strog did not speak up immediately, making it clear he would not jump to her orders.
He rubbed his hands, looked over his armor, stroked his beard; all with careful
deliberation. Finally, after completing this silent ritual, he addressed the queen with near
contempt.
"My forces have yet to be defeated. I took this castle from Jon without the loss of a
single soldier. My army crushed the algors in their own stronghold, killed over a
thousand of their kind. I now have the desert covered with a well defined spread of
listening posts. The algors in the Lacobian won't be able to take a stroll without me
knowing about it. I have succeeded in exercising every advantage over the algors and
leaving them decimated. As for the delver and the elves, capturing or killing them was
never one of my military objectives. Retreat does not mean defeat, especially when in
retreat I gain yet another advantage..."
"Advantage? In retreat?"
Strog continued despite the interruption, "... and another source of information. I now
know that a delver and two elves were venturing into the desert in the direction of the
algor stronghold. That raises many questions. If my commandos had been captured I
would not have that information."
Yave bit down on her fury. His meaning reached her. "What do you think they were
doing out there?"
"It seems obvious. Two elves and the delver from Sanctum moving towards the algors
at the same moment we were about to attack. That is too much for simple coincidence.
The elves must have found out about our plans. That in itself is important. It means that
there are still dwarves in Dunop that have not accepted our ideas. There must be some
that decided to betray their own and reveal our plans to the elves. These elves took it
upon themselves to join with the delver to warn the algors."
"No, not just warn. They were going to offer an alliance against us," Yave bellowed.
Strog showed surprise. Yave did not contradict his theory. In fact, she furthered it to a
point beyond his own contentions. He reacted with reluctance. "I have heard nothing of a
possible alliance. But as I said, at the very least they were surely prepared to warn the
algors of our attack. If they had succeeded in that, the results may have been disastrous.
Based on this information, we have uncovered a great threat, a threat which now must be
silenced. It is now imperative that we find the disloyal dwarves that betrayed our cause.
We can not allow them to hamper our efforts."
Yave barely heard Strog's words. The thought of more enemies burned her thoughts,
not the disloyal dwarves but the delver and the elves. Ryson Acumen, Lief Woodson,
Holli Brances; all of them were with Tun when he died. None of them did anything to
save her son. They were as guilty as the algors, as guilty as Jon. Now, they moved to join
forces against her.
"Is there no end to this injustice?" she ranted. "They kill my son, the true heir to my
throne, but they are not satisfied. Now, they wish to help those most responsible. They
will all pay." Again she wished to hurl something across the room, but her hand was
empty. The innocent object that suffered at her last tirade, the goblet, rested too far away
to retrieve. Her fist pounded down upon the arm of her throne.
"They failed in their attempt," Strog stated victoriously, as if the queen had nothing to
rave about. "My forces crushed the algors before they could be warned. There is little left
of the algors in the Lacobian, certainly too few and too disorganized to mantle a
successful response attack. I need only send my army on another offensive tonight, and
the algors will be vanquished completely. We will then destroy their stronghold. Though
there are still many wandering about the desert, they are isolated. They will not be
allowed to regroup, and without their stronghold, they will have no place to coordinate
any counter- offensive. Those that are left will be forced to wander the desert, and we
will pick them off one by one."
"Fool!" Yave cursed. "You spout as if you have won. You have won nothing. The
elves have shown they are willing to ally with the algors. The humans as well, the delver
will convince them. When you send our army back into the desert, we will be open to
attack. The elves are from Dark Spruce, they know the entrance to our city. This is
exactly the opportunity they will be looking for."
The War Com stared at the queen in total bewilderment. "What are you talking
about?"
Yave ranted with the hostility. Her voice shifted in volume and tone, exemplifying the
twisted path of her thoughts. "Holli Brances and Lief Woodson! They come from Dark
Spruce. They are angry with us for cutting off trade. They are looking for an excuse to
attack us. They don't trust us. That is why they were going to offer their assistance to the
algors. Just as they saw that Tun was killed, they will see the rest of us dead as well. The
delver, all delvers, they live with humans. They can not be trusted. Ryson Acumen will
see that the humans side with the elves and the algors. His sympathy is with them, that is
why he was in the desert!"
Strog did not know how to deal with Yave's madness. He spoke with uncertainty, his
own confidence faltering, his voice was halting. "My spies say nothing of coordinated elf
movements. My reports say they are preparing for the dormant season, nothing more."
"Your spies did not tell you of the delver and the two elves going into the Lacobian."
"I can not keep track of each individual elf."
"But you admit the elves must have found out about our plans to attack the algors.
You spoke of dwarves who were informing the elves. Your spies did not uncover this
either."
"But there is nothing to indicate the elves are preparing to attack."
"What do you need to see? The elves and humans banded together with swords drawn
in this very room? I tell you the signs are there. They are allied with the algors."
Strog threw open his hands. His lips curled into a grotesque frown. "So what is it you
think we should do?"
"We must attack," she hissed like a cobra about to strike.
"That is what I said," Strog groaned with frustration. Yave's madness was unyielding,
it drove him to astonishment. "We will attack the algors tonight. Finish them off."
Yave slapped him across his face. His beard muffled the clap of her palm against his
cheek. Still, the quick smack resonated through the throne room, served as a precursor for
yet another tirade by the queen.
"You fool! You damned fool! Not the algors. We can deal with them later. The elves
are the threat, the elves and the humans. We must attack them now. Attack them before
they can attack us."
Strog was too shocked to react. No dwarf had ever dared strike him. He was powerful,
able to pull stone apart with his bare hands. He could have yanked Yave's head from her
neck with but a simple tug. The slap, however, meant less than the fact that she was
actually challenging his tactics, his battle strategy. She, who had no network of
intelligence, no soldiers to command, no experience in battle, she was telling him who to
attack and when. Ludicrous.
"Attack the elves?" His face twisted with mystification. The plan had no military merit
whatsoever. Open a second front, another battle enemy when the first was not yet
destroyed, the concept was ridiculous.
Yave scorned his shock. "You would have them attack us while your army is in the
Lacobian desert? No. Recall our forces at once. Divide them into separate divisions. One
to handle the humans, the other to attack the elves in Dark Spruce."
The outrageousness of her suggestion made him forget her physical attack upon his
face. The possible redeployment of his army to handle a threat which did not exist defied
all reason. Strog shook his head vehemently. "No! No! That is not sound. We have two
important objectives that must be fulfilled right now! We must ferret out disloyal
dwarves in Dunop and we must finish off the algors. We must not attack the elves while
the algors remain a threat. And we can not even conceive of another attack plan until we
know what dwarves are revealing our secrets to the elves."
"Which is even more reason to attack the elves now!" Yave shouted over him. "If they
have set up a network of spies, does that not convince you of their ill-will? Consider the
pure, simple facts. If the elves knew we were to attack the algors, they also know the
extent of our forces to protect our own city."
Strog stammered. Yave's distortion of the obvious forced him to consider irrelevant
factors. For a moment, he began to question his own tactics, second-guess the very
actions which so far had led to overwhelming victory.
"It is true the city is ill prepared to fight off an attack," he conceded. "I used the core
of our forces to attack the algors. I wanted to make our attack complete. I needed warriors
to fill the algor stronghold. I also need sentries in the desert to track movement."
Strog caught himself. What was he doing? Why was he even entertaining these
thoughts? His strategies were sound. Why listen to the delusions of a deranged, vengeful
queen? His objection spilled from his lips like water over a dam. "No! This is madness. I
have deployed my forces with reason. As I said before, there is no sound military tactic in
redeploying our forces. We must see to the end of the algors before we consider a threat
that does not exist. The elves will not attack us."
Yave glared. She throttled her fury, her madness. She embraced the power and the
authority that was hers as queen and shoved it in Strog's face. "I am not asking you, I am
telling you. You will hold your attack on the algors. You will recall your army and you
will attack the elves and humans."
Strog stood at the edge, but a hair's width from crossing the dangerous threshold of
refusing the queen's authority, of perhaps even committing regicide. Why not? They had
overthrown Jon. Yave was their puppet. Why continue the charade?
The answer held his hands from violence. There were still dwarves who resisted the
separatists, spies revealing secrets to the elves. They were small in number, probably only
a handful, but they underscored the continued need for a puppet leader. Yave would keep
the masses of Dunop pacified, while the separatists fought for greater control. They
would remove her, eventually, but not now. Now, they could ill-afford a civil war.
Strog scowled, decided to maintain his cloak of service to the queen. It took long
moments and the self-control of a seasoned warrior and general, but he answered with
veiled respect to her authority.
"Of course it is your decision, but it is my duty to inform you of the great risks
involved in such an undertaking." His words were cold and they sickened him as he
spoke. "It is your will, but attacking the elves and humans at this moment entails factors
you may not have considered. First, there is the fact that dwarves within Dunop must still
be communicating with the elves in Dark Spruce. Otherwise, how would they have
known to warn the algors? What good would it do to develop battle strategies against the
elves if those same plans will be revealed to the enemy?"
Yave shrugged with contempt at the need for strategy. "What plans do you need?
They are elves, we are dwarves. We know where their camp is. Strike and attack at
night."
Strog bit down on his lip before continuing with other objections. "And what of the
humans? Where do I center my attack? Burbon? Pinesway? Connel? Even farther? The
humans outnumber us. They have towns spread across the land. To attack even a quarter
of their known villages, I would have to divide my army into nothing more than raiding
parties that would make goblins laugh and would be decimated in seconds."
Yave folded her arms. She stood from her chair and stomped across the room. Her
foot reached the goblet and kicked it back against the wall. Another dent bent the rim.
She turned away, whirled about and paced heavily back to her throne. She grumbled
about the humans multiplying like rodents, filling the far corners of the land. She threw
her gaze back at Strog as an idea developed in her angry tormented mind.
"Then we'll have to increase the size of our army."
Strog shook his head. "Every available dwarf in Dunop is already within our service."
"Then look beyond Dunop."
"You can't be serious," Strog responded sternly. "Do you really think other cities will
join us? They remain under the rule of long standing royalty. I doubt royal leaders will be
willing to ally with us. They view us as renegades, a threat to their own rule. Until our
movement spreads, we must rely on our own strength."
The queen again turned and paced the room. This time she allowed the mangled goblet
a reprieve. She left it alone.
Strog settled in a sense of relief. He had talked the queen out of these senseless
judgments. He was once more in control of tactical decisions. There would be no
foolishness, no absurd attacks upon the elves and the humans, at least not until the algors
were destroyed, or so he believed.
Yave barked a single command as she strode toward the door. "Follow me!"
Strog obeyed, not out of respect for her authority, but out of curiosity. What did she
want of him now? What foolish ideas would her madness lead them upon? The metal
soles of Strog's war boots clicked first against the stone hallway, and then against the
descending steps of a granite staircase. After but a few moments, Yave's destination was
obvious, the cell where Jon was imprisoned. Further and further they descended the dark,
spiraling staircase that led to the bowels of the castle. The meager but steady light which
bathed most of the underground city drifted away. Haphazardly placed torches spotted
the walls. The trapped smoke swayed lazily with a sickening mildew smell which
drenched the air. Cracks, bordering on fissures, decorated the tubular paths of this
dungeon.
Yave stepped away from the stairway, not quite at the bottom tier. She moved along a
platform to a side tunnel. She past silently by two dwarf guards that appeared enamored
by the silence and the darkness of their post. They made little notice of the queen, their
attention fixed on Strog. They would follow his orders, not hers. In truth, they wondered
if the queen was going to join her son as prisoner.
Strog made a sideways glance to them, and motioned for them to stay at their posts.
He unenthusiastically grabbed a set of keys from a lonely hook imbedded in the wall. He
knew where the queen wanted to go, but still had no idea why.
Yave stopped in front of a thick, wooden door. The rot decried its age, revealed its
origin. Ancient wood had been collected by the elves, traded to the dwarves in return for
stone and gems. Its very existence repulsed her. It reminded her of the elves and how they
were willing to betray her, just as they betrayed Tun. She shuddered with anger, almost
lost sight of her true purpose.
Strog watched her carefully, did not move to open the door until she so directed. He
would not assume anything beyond this point. Her purpose remained hidden, and so, he
would wait.
"Open it!" Yave snarled.
He complied. His thick fingers found it difficult to apply the key into its hole. After
some deliberation, he finally turned the latch. He pressed open the heavy, thick door.
Stone hinges grated in angry upheaval as the door swung into the cell.
Jon did not look up. He sat alone, unchained upon a squared stone block, a bunk for
the damned. The cell opened up into a large oval expanse. There were no corners. Rubble
littered the floor. Streams of dirty underground water washed down over long sections of
the walls. Not a fitting place for the only remaining blood-true Folarok in Dunop.
Jon ignored his guests. Unresponsive, he sat with his face in his hands. Removed of all
armor, weapons, and any garment which rendered him as royalty, he appeared more like
a beggar in tattered clothes than a prince or a king. His hair disheveled, his beard unruly;
his figure appeared at home in these dark, forbidding surroundings.
Yave felt nothing for her son, no sympathy, no regret over her own actions that led to
his downfall. Her thoughts so scrambled with the boiling desire for revenge, she did not
even recognize him as her son. He was a traitor, and her voice revealed these feelings
with the black clarity of a winter night sky.
"I want to talk to you. You have information I need."
Jon's face remained buried in his palms. Her voice held nothing that he would
recognize. Even if it did, he had spiraled so far into his own personal abyss that his own
recollections of reality were muddled into twisted nightmares. He coughed.
Strog measured the reactions of both Jon and Yave. He found delight in Jon's
despondency. He was broken, no longer a threat to the separatist movement. They could
release him this moment and he would do no harm. He would probably wander helplessly
through the darkest tunnel ways of Dunop until he perished from hunger.
Yave's indifference, however, left him cold. How could a mother have distanced
herself so far from her own son? It puzzled him beyond the considerations of family
relations. He had spent a lifetime studying all aspects of war, including emotional
responses which may sway the tide of battle. He had learned that those fighting for home
and family normally fought beyond their normal capacities, while foreign invaders
usually suffered morale difficulties due to a longing to be back with loved ones. Here,
however, was a mother so distanced from her only surviving family member, she
considered him an enemy.
This simple aspect made Yave a dangerous individual. Whether it is madness,
vengeance, or simple blood lust, Strog realized it would have to be considered in each of
his future dealings with Yave. After all, the queen would be removed from power
eventually. It was best if Strog remembered her apathy as well as her emotional tirades.
In this instance, Yave remained as cold as a north wind blowing off snow capped
mountains, and her accusations rang as frigid.
"The elves are allying with our enemies, but then you probably already knew that."
Her decree made no sense to Jon. He remained silent.
"Denying it will not help you. You were against breaking ties with the elves when you
took the throne. You probably know much about the spies that even now are probably
working to betray your own people."
Jon did not stir, did not care. Elves? Spies? Who cared of elves and spies? His life was
ruined. He had lost everything. But then, he had also realized his wish. He was relieved
of his responsibilities. Yes, the crown was taken from him, but it was something he never
wanted in the first place. Being thrown into this prison was a small price to pay for being
freed of such responsibility.
Yave remained undeterred by Jon's passivity. "You will tell me of what you know.
You will tell me what alliances were made upon Sanctum. You will tell me why the elves
wish to warn the algors. You will tell me why Ryson Acumen is now interfering in our
business and you will tell me where I can find him."
Whereas Yave's voice could not inspire a reaction from Jon, the mention of the
delver's name brought him to life. His hands dropped to his lap, then to his side as he
lifted himself from his rock bed. His eyes lit upon the queen, but there was no true
recognition. Only the face of the delver danced in his thoughts.
"Ryson?" he whispered.
Strog watched intently. The name of the delver had almost hypnotized the imprisoned
dwarf and prisoners often spoke freely under such delusions, giving away important
intelligence.
"Yes, Ryson Acumen. The one who helped you kill Tun." Yave sneered with
contempt at having to repeat the name. She faced her son with growing emotion, not love
or sympathy, but anger and condemnation.
Strog gripped her arm. He wanted her to remain silent - let the prisoner spout
important information, leave him in his trance. To interrupt with aggressive, hostile
remarks was plain foolishness, and he would not have it.
She tried to yank her arm free in a fit of unbridled fury, but Strog's grip tightened. She
went to slap him again, but his other arm blocked the blow. She reached to claw out his
eyes. Her fingers were seized in mid-air. As Strog bent them back with force, she gulped
down a moan of pain.
"What are you doing?"
"If you remain silent, we will have the information you obviously came down here
for."
Jon slanted his head in confusion. He heard their voices, saw their struggle, but didn't
understand it. Still failing to show recognition to his mother the queen, his focus drifted
off. Whatever had stirred him from his resignation was drifting away, a dying echo of a
name he thought he knew. His eyes fell to the floor. The dull grey slate welcomed him.
The blank environment held his desires. In this cell he had no responsibilities, no
decisions to make. He was not king, he was not prince. His stomach did not ache, did not
tie into knots with the worries of matters beyond his control. He was safe. His shoulders
slouched, not with the weight of a heavy burden, but with the freedom of near
nonexistence.
Yave still struggled with Strog. She snarled with anger as he pulled her from the cell.
When Strog released her to shut the cell door, she leapt upon him. Pounding furiously
upon his head.
"You dare touch me!" she growled. "I will have you killed. I will hang your fingers
around my neck!"
Strog threw her off him. He did not draw the heavy double-bladed axe which hung
from his belt, though he surely felt the desire. He pulled just enough diplomacy from his
words to slowly calm the enraged queen.
"I am simply following your own direction. Though you have not spoken the order, I
see why you have brought me here. You wish to obtain information from Jon as to the
identity of spies and the whereabouts of the delver. It is obvious that this is paramount to
your wishes to defeat the algors as well as the elves. Jon was about to reveal much, he
does not recognize you. The name of the delver stirred him into a susceptible state. If,
however, he realized you meant to do the delver harm, he would have ceased. I did not
wish to assault your person, but you were about to unknowingly hinder your own
objectives. If we do not contradict or intimidate the prisoner, he will reveal much to us.
But we must remain in control. Forgive me your majesty." These last words pained the
War Com, but they were needed to assuage the queen of her growing resentment.
Yave heaved an unforgiving grunt of dissatisfaction. "You are never to touch me
again!"
Strog bit down on his lip. In his mind, he imagined the day when he would strangle
her, or behead her with several chops of a dull axe. The vivid image made his next words
almost palatable. "Again, I am sorry. It is my wish only to serve you and your cause."
The queen brushed his apparent apology aside. Her eyes set upon the cell door like a
hungry jackal eyeing a sickly rabbit. "If you think you can get information, then do so. I
want to know where the delver lives. Delvers make their homes in human towns. Find the
town he comes from and we will know what humans to target. That is the reason I
brought you here. Once we know where to strike the humans, you will have no further
excuses. We can move forth with my plans and soon every race in Uton will learn of
dwarf justice."
One look at Yave made it obvious that debate was useless. Revenge was her only
motive. It did not matter to her that the algors were still a threat, and their decimation
should be the foremost military objective. Her fury had pushed her to paranoia. It was not
enough to attack the algors, she wished to extract revenge from all she blamed, and that
included the elves, humans, and delvers. Strog's cautions would not stop her. She was not
concerned with judicial strategy. Once she narrowed her sights upon one human village,
she would order him to move against the elves as well as the humans.
Strog fumed. His command over battle strategies was being ripped from him by the
delusions of a mad woman who was now queen. He bristled at the perspectives. He
would have to divide his army as well as leave an injured and angry enemy at his flank
before finishing the job. He would open a second and third front by attacking the elves
and the humans. He saw no signs the elves were allied with the algors, but an unprovoked
attack would certainly lead to such an alliance. The algors would be given time to
regroup while humans and elves offered their assistance, all of this while he could not
obtain the assistance of neighboring dwarf cities. The forces of Dunop would stand alone.
Yet, he abandoned all hope of making Yave see this point. There was little he could
do or say to convince her. If he resisted her orders, she would call for his execution. He
would be forced to remove her from power. Subsequent events became clear. Royalists
that accepted the separatists because of the queen would revolt. They would be embroiled
in a civil war. Neighboring dwarf cities may then interfere, but not on the side of the
separatists. They would seize the opportunity to restore pure monarchy to Dunop. The
separatists would surely be defeated and their cause destroyed forever.
There was but one hope Strog could seize upon. If Yave could be pacified with a small
strike upon the elves of Dark Spruce and one human village, he may yet keep his army
intact without inviting major reprisals. The humans will not know where to attack and the
elves may be too confused to understand what is actually happening. If he was lucky, he
could regroup his army and send them to finish off the algors before they truly allied in
force against him. It was thus now to his advantage to uncover the very knowledge Yave
desired. He needed to narrow the possible human target sites as well as uncover any
information as to possible dwarf traitors that might warn the elves.
Strog turned from Yave, exasperated but intent on obtaining what he needed to know.
He swung the cell door back open and again stepped back inside. He pulled the door shut
before Yave could accompany him. Best to leave her outside where her tirades would not
deter the success of the interrogation.
Jon remained standing. He stared contentedly at the floor. He showed no response to
the opening of his cell door and made no acknowledgment of Strog's return.
The War Com considered how to bring Jon back to a susceptible state, to place the
dethroned king into the trance that made questioning more permissive. Strog whispered
words and phrases that he hoped would recall the trance.
"Sanctum. Ryson Acumen. The elves, Lief Woodson and Holli Brances. They wish to
be with you again."
"Sanctum?" Jon closed his eyes in anguish. He thought of the dark hollow mountain,
how it claimed the life of his brother. The pain began to clear his mind.
Strog cursed under his breath at his own error. He struggled to correct it. "The delver,
Ryson Acumen. He saved the land. Do you not wish to see him?"
Jon opened his eyes. He looked to the War Com. There was no trance. He recognized
Strog immediately, a leader of the separatists, an enemy to the throne. He recalled the last
few moments. He knew his mother was in his cell, guessed she was now waiting outside.
The ex-king bristled with animosity.
"What is it you really want? What is it your queen wants?"
Yave threw open the cell door. The resoluteness of Jon's voice disturbed the War
Com, but it enraged the queen.
"I want to know everything about the delver Ryson Acumen."
"Why?"
"You will tell me what I want to know!"
"Why?" Jon repeated. He stood straight and defiant. For only the second time since
Bol left, he appeared as a king.
His resolve enraged the queen. Yave shrieked. "Because I command it."
Jon almost laughed. "You? You command me? I am either a king or I'm a condemned
dwarf. No matter which way you look at it, I do not have to take your orders. Since my
removal from the throne was illegal and immoral, I will not recognize your rule, and I do
not take commands."
Jon turned his back on his mother. He thought of Bol, how he turned his back on all of
Dunop. He almost smiled at the irony.
"You will tell me!" Yave bellowed.
Jon's back responded the same as his front. "Why?"
Strog interrupted strongly. "The delver has made an attempt to interfere with us. We
wish to know why."
"What has he done?"
Strog grumbled. He was supposed to be asking the questions, not answering them.
Still, he needed the information.
"He was in the desert, heading toward the algors. He was going to warn them of our
attack. You believed he was a friend of yours. If he is a friend, why would he take the
algors' side over ours?"
"Probably because he knows your cause is unjust."
Strog saw an opening, a way to trick Jon into saying more than he should. He moved
carefully. "The delver would not take sides otherwise?"
"Of course not."
"You know him that well?"
"Well enough."
"So he would wish to help the algors against the dwarves only because, as you put it,
we are being unjust."
Jon nodded.
"Why would he think our cause is unjust?"
"Because he knows the algors had nothing to do with..." He could not say his brother's
name. "The algors did nothing to invite an attack against them."
Jon became tired. He had not had to think much over the past few days. If anything, he
avoided contemplation while he embraced the welcome oblivion of his cell. Strog was
forcing him to recall painful memories. He did not wish to continue the conversation.
Strog, however, pressed the weakness of his opponent. "You might hold the algors
blameless, but you can not deny that they had much to do with your brother's death. After
all, they created the sand giant that killed him."
Jon did not answer. He walked back to his stone bed. He threw himself down upon it
heavily, his back still to the queen and the War Com.
Yave was about to demand answers, but Strog held his hand up for her to remain
quiet. Amazingly, she obeyed. She watched curiously as Strog continued to build the web
that would ensnare the answers he desired.
"So, the delver may agree with you that the algors were not at fault. He would argue
your cause?"
Ryson's face etched itself in Jon's thoughts. Yes, the delver would argue for him,
would argue for the algors. That was the answer. With a spark of hope, Jon turned to face
Yave. He spoke to her, not to Strog.
"You blame me, you blame the algors, but you are wrong. Ryson would know that.
Ask him."
"He would lie." Yave spat out before Strog could stop her.
"No, he wouldn't. He did everything he could to save the land, to save everyone,
including the dwarves. You would have to believe him."
"We can not talk to him," Strog interrupted and then quickly pressed a question for
information he wanted. "We do not know where to find him. We do not even know where
to look. Do you?"
"But you said you knew he was in the desert hoping to warn the algors."
"The delver forced a small party of dwarves at a listening post to retreat. He did not
stop to explain his actions or tell us where he would be. I imagine he has returned to his
home. I do not know where that is."
Jon searched his memory. It caused him pain, but he recalled such facts which he
unwittingly revealed to his captor. "He lived in Connel. That's where we met before we
went to Sanctum. He also said something about Burbon. He said he had to go there to
explain things to some humans."
Strog nodded appreciatively. Two targets, not dozens. Connel was large, fitted with a
human army according to his own information, but Burbon was small and relatively
unprotected.
Jon clung to his hope. He turned his attention back to Yave. "You will talk to Ryson.
He will tell you, tell you it was the sphere, not the algors, and not me."
Strog placed himself in between Jon and the queen. He still needed more information.
He could not afford to have the queen force an end to this conversation. He spoke quickly
before Yave could respond on her own.
"He may do that, then again he may not. As I said, the last we saw of this delver friend
of yours, he was attempting to help the algors against us. I still don't know why he would
do that."
"Because he knows what you’re doing is wrong?"
"How would he know exactly what we're doing or why? He has not been to Dunop.
How can you say he knows our intentions or our reasons?"
"He would hear of it. He is a delver. He thirsts for information."
"But how would he come about information like that? It doesn't make any sense to me.
Unless of course you think he was spying on us? And if he was, why would he?"
"He wouldn't spy," Jon insisted. "He probably heard rumors."
Strog spoke quickly, pressing the matter to a head. "But this is not a rumor. He knew
of a fact, he knew of our plans to attack. You ask us to speak to him, to allow him to
convince us the algors deserve no blame. But how can we trust him, if it seems as if he
has knowledge of secret plans? What if he had warned the algors? Many dwarves would
have died. You have to explain how he knew this before we can trust any of his own
explanations."
"I don't know how he found out. There were probably dwarves who told the elves."
"Why would dwarves tell elves of our plans?"
"Because it's wrong to attack the algors." Jon was going in circles. He was confused,
exasperated.
"Do you know how far-fetched that sounds? Dwarves warning elves about our plans
involving algors? I would never believe it. The delver must have been spying on us, thus
he is an unreliable source of information."
"It's not far-fetched."
"It is! What dwarf would do such a thing as reveal secrets to the elves? Name one?"
The question hung in the air. It went unanswered. Again, only for a moment, Jon’s
mind lost its confusion and Strog's desire was clear to Jon. He wanted names, names of
dwarves he could list as traitors and publicly execute. Jon thought of Hern, his friend, his
advisor, pierced through the heart because he condemned the actions of the true traitors.
Jon knew, knew if he spoke a single name, he would condemn that dwarf to death. For
the first time since being thrown in this cell, he felt that familiar twinge in his stomach.
He felt the burden of knowing too much. He shook his head at Strog.
"No. I won't give you want you want. If you want to hang traitors, look no further than
a mirror. And hang those that helped you." He looked to Yave. "Hang her as well."
Strog saw the conviction in Jon's expression. He would say no more. It didn't matter.
He had gained enough. He had learned of the delver's territory. He would not have to
spread his army thin to meet Yave's cravings for vengeance. He led the queen out of the
cell and relocked the door.
Jon was left to his emptiness; an emptiness he wished had remained unbroken.

At Yave's order, Strog assembled his generals, and the queen addressed them with
unyielding demands.
"The algors are not alone in their assault against us," she declared wild-eyed and
snarling. "We have been targeted by others. It seems as if the elves of Dark Spruce are
not happy with our arrangements. Perhaps they believe if we won't trade with them, they
will simply steal from us. If you doubt me, know this; two elves were found trying to
warn the algors of our plans. The only reason for this is obvious. They wish to gain allies
in hopes of restoring their power over us. We will not allow this. Their interference is as
much a declaration of war."
The dwarf generals murmured. They needed little encouragement to despise and
distrust the elves. They were all from the separatist movement, and all believed in dwarf
independence and superiority. Not one had ever felt comfortable with the trade
arrangements made with the elves. Relying on them for food for their tables and wood for
their fires made them as dependent as infants. It struck at their pride as well as their
desire for independence. Now that they were in control, they had seen to the end of such
dependence, but they would always remember the smugness of the elves, their arrogance.
It did not surprise these generals that the elves would wish to continue their subjugation
of the dwarves, and they would not question the validity of Yave's accusations.
Yave spoke on, unrelenting in her charges. "We have identified the elves, and they are
indeed from Dark Spruce. It appears that our former trading partners will not allow us to
simply end our dependence upon them. They have their reasons for wanting us to lose to
the algors. These same elves now are left without a source of gems, gold, or iron. They
are incapable of mining for themselves. Is it any wonder they would seek to sabotage our
efforts? If they weaken us, they force us to renew our trade with them. If they attack us
while our forces are occupied, they could march on Dunop and take whatever they
desire."
The grumbles of the generals turned to outright denunciations of the elves.
"Never!"
"Over our corpses."
Yave nodded with a smirk. "That is my feeling exactly. That is why I have already
ordered Strog to recall his army this day. We will not be unprepared for these unprovoked
attacks against our independence. In fact, since the elves have made the first move of
aggression in trying to ally with our enemies, we have no choice but to respond in kind. If
we allow this action to go unpunished, the elves will still believe they can dictate their
own rules upon us. Consider what might have happened if the elves' ploy was successful.
According to the War Com, if the algors had been warned, hundreds of dwarf warriors
would have been slain at their hands. This can only be what the elves wanted, why else
would they seek to warn our enemies?"
Strog wished to speak out, to clarify the strategies, but the generals were filled with
anger. They had no more love for the queen than he, but they hated the elves. Their
emotions now blinded them. He remained silent, contemplating his true alternatives. He
could only hope that Yave would agree to a single quick strike against the two human
towns and the elves of Dark Spruce, then allow him to return to the algors. The thought
of marching his army back and forth through the tunnels under the Lacobian desert
disgusted him, but he had little choice. Yave was forcing this upon him, and all he could
do was develop the best plans to deal with a now growing war.
He played over several strategies in his mind involving the deployment of his forces.
He would send the bulk of his army and his finest men against Connel. The town was
large, and though defended by a full garrison, the humans would be unprepared for the
assault. The dwarves could pick their targets and would probably face little casualties.
They would do great damage, but remain prepared to return to the Lacobian to finish off
the algors. He could send a much smaller party against the town of Burbon and also do
significant damage. As for the elves, it was also best to send a smaller band of warriors,
make it look like a group of renegades as opposed to an organized force. This might keep
the elves guessing as to the reasons behind the attack and stall any concerted offensive on
their part against Dunop.
As Strog mulled over these strategies, Yave had continued with her harangue against
the elves. The generals were now calling for the blood of the elves, just as Yave added
another enemy to their list.
"I am afraid it does not end their," she growled. "The elves did not act alone. A delver
was with them to warn the algors. I need not remind you that delvers live with humans.
But I ask you why would a delver concern himself with our dealings? Could it be he
knows of our reserves of gold and gems? We all know of the humans' greed. If they see
an opportunity to steal from us, they will seize it. Thus, we are alone and face many
enemies. There is but one thing we can do. We must fight."
The generals agreed with shouts and war cries, all save Strog. His silence did not go
unnoticed. Yave brought the attention of the others down upon him.
"As I have said, I have asked the War Com to recall our army. It is now time he
profess his strategies to deal with our many enemies."
Strog spoke evenly, but with a low grumbling voice. He mapped out his strategies and
the deployment of his forces. His plans involving the humans were well received. The
small force against the elves, however, was questioned vigorously by both Yave and the
lower ranking generals. He defended his points with crisp strategy; tactics the queen
scoffed at, but the generals embraced. They could not deny his basic assumptions and in
the face of their agreement, even Yave was forced to submit.
The queen, however, remained intent upon having the last word. "So what do my
generals say? Which of you will lead an attack against the elves of Dark Spruce?"
Each general volunteered save Strog. Yave picked one, then set her sights upon the
War Com.
"You withheld. I can only surmise that means you wish to lead your troops against the
humans. I shall allow you to lead the large force against Connel."
It was a calculated move, a direct affront against him. There was little to gain in
leading this assault and much to lose. Since the strength of the army would be under his
command, Strog would be expected to win and win easily. There would be little honor or
glory won in even the most convincing of victories. Any sufficient dwarf casualties or
failures to impose severe damage to the human city would be viewed in total disgrace.
Strog saw this for what it was, but refused to react. He accepted the command with a nod.

Twilight in Burbon. The moon would be in quarter phase, but it had not yet risen
above the horizon. A full harvest moon would have given enough light to read by, but
that was still several days away. Fading light in the west left the sky a deep dark blue, not
quite the black of night. Most stars remained blanketed out of sight, only a few bright
ones in the east were visible. The air was dry but cold, even for dusk in the harvest
season, the wind absent. The scent of many fires from a host of chimneys filled the
streets. The plumes of smoke drifted lazily about rooftops, wafting in the air with no
particular place to go.
The dwarves broke through the surface in a dirt alley between a private residence and
a shoemakers shop. Covered in dirt from digging their access tunnel and dressed in black
battle dress, they faded easily into the shadows. Dark chest plates protected their stout
bodies, horned battle helmets covered their wide heads. They appeared like small, dirty
tanks moving silently through this dark passage of Burbon. Broad shouldered and armed
with axe, broadsword, and mace, they spilled upwards from the hole in the ground. They
took to several diamond shaped formations and remained silent and unmoving until each
was in ready position.
They were not seen, not by citizens and not by Burbon's guard. The soldiers were busy
watching for goblins at the clearing outside the wall. The human troops stood in the
towers and at the gates. They remained alert, but their patrols were designed to catch
threats before they reached the wall. The guard could not have guessed an enemy was
already inside and ready to strike.
As for the ordinary citizens of Burbon, most were already off the streets. Though they
had faith in Sy and Enin, the thought of goblin raiding parties kept them from
unnecessary evening travel and most remained in their homes. Shades covered windows.
Those that were uncovered revealed the blazing glow of hearth fires. Only a few souls
braved the dark, and these lonely travelers moved quickly to the taverns and inns. They
had no desire to walk along aimlessly or to lengthen their route to enjoy the clear harvest
night. They chose direct paths and well lit streets. Since the shoemaker's shop was closed,
no one ventured near this particular dark alley.
The dwarf commander in charge of this attack considered his situation and the means
to achieve his objectives. He was to cause major casualties to the human guard, to destroy
their military headquarters as well as any weapon stores, and relieve the humans of their
food supplies. Underground listening posts had identified and located most of the targets.
The office of the captain was located near the center of town, as were many general
stores. The dwarf commander now had his strike force above ground, covered in the
darkness and in formation. He need only make his way to the guard headquarters to
achieve the better part of his objectives. His eyes narrowed. Accustomed to the relative
darkness of his underground home of Dunop, he saw well into the night.
Most of Burbon's streets were well-lit with flaming lamps. Only side alleys remained
bathed in darkness. The main roads were straight and clear of obstruction. The dwarves
would have to venture into the light of the lamps if they wished to reach the city center.
There were only meager shadows and even less cover. The commander lifted his arm and
waved to the opposite end of his formation. A dwarf sentry moved across the alley to
make his report.
"Human guards spotted near the wall. They are moving away from us, watching the
perimeter. Four towers with full compliments accounted for. All watching outside the
wall. Fifth tower out of my sight. Sixth tower incomplete, no platform, and no guard.
Inspection of either the north or south gate impossible at this time."
The sentry waited for further orders.
The commander whispered them, but with no less bark of authority. "Take two axe
men. Return to the tunnel. Take the second exploratory tunnel and resurface near the
sixth tower. Chop the support beams of the unfinished platform. When it collapses, return
here."
The sentry did not delay. He tapped two dwarves upon the shoulder before diving back
into the tunnel. The two dwarves followed obediently.

Enin stood near the south gate. His attention remained focused beyond the wall, upon
his magic web that covered the blind spot in the hills. The wizard had recast the spell
only moments ago, and the web was restored to full power. It was ready to catch its
intended prey, but Enin truly doubted it would be necessary. Since Ryson had left, there
were no further signs of goblins, or of the serp and the shag. The wizard felt nothing,
sensed nothing. If there were goblins out there, they were far in the hills. They were
certainly not near his web, he would have sensed them. Enin felt secure enough to
consider what he had learned about the web spell. Though several guards stood around
him, he spoke openly to himself of altering the spell in another form.
"I thought of a spider, like a spider, and I created a web. Combining a trap with a
warning. Stronger spells of the same kind could be very helpful to us. It's good to be
warned of an enemy, but even better to trap it before it can cause any harm."
The soldiers nodded. Certainly their jobs would be easier, safer, if Enin could trap the
goblins before a battle ensued. Most every guard there had faced the hail of crossbow
fire. A few had been hit in the arms and shoulders. Perhaps magic was a dangerous thing,
but they'd welcome a spell which would remove them from harms way.
Enin paid them little attention. He focused on his own calculations as he continued to
speak of them aloud. "A web is nice for small areas, but it can be avoided. I could
probably enlarge the web, but that would take more energy. It would also lock us in as
well as locking others out. We couldn't get to the fields, merchants couldn't enter the
gates. No, that won't do. It has to be something that identifies a true threat and only stops
that. That's an interesting thought. A spell that can identify as well as trap and warn. Now
that would be a great spell. I wonder how much power it would take. What would it be
like? A circling wind. It would pass around the walls constantly. When it touched
someone, it would identify, and then, decide whether to strike. Like a hunter wind! I don't
know if that's possible. I wonder if it can attune to the different way the magic surrounds
everyone. The goblins have a different aura of magic. What if the spell could react to that
specific aura? That might actually work. It would take time. I'd really have to know what
makes the magic around the goblins different. But the wind idea is a good one. It could
sweep around gently until it hits a goblin, then it could alter into something more
powerful, like a tornado, trapping the goblin at its center."
A familiar voice called out to interrupt the wizard's concentration. "Thinking of more
ways to trap our friends out there? That's good. I like to hear it."
Enin snapped from his thoughts to see Sy walking up to him. The captain clapped him
on the shoulder.
"I was just thinking about variations of my web spell." Enin explained. "Spells like
that can be quite useful."
"I know. Did you recast the web?"
"Yes, just a few moments ago."
"How are you feeling?"
"I'm fine. It really doesn't take much energy."
"Well don't exhaust yourself," the captain advised. "I'm not too worried about tonight.
My men have been briefed. I've been going around to each post and no one has seen a
thing. All the lamps are lit in the clearing and the sky's clear. There's no sign of any
movement. The tower guards are reporting all clear. I think when the serp ran into Ryson,
it knew it would have to delay any plans for a raid. How about you? Have you sensed
anything out there?"
Enin was not allowed to answer. A crash from the southeastern edge of town broke the
silence of the night, not quite an explosion, but loud enough to shake the windows of
most of the shops. Silence followed for but a brief moment. Quickly after, calls shot out
from all over town. Shutters were opened by worried, yet curious, townspeople. The
fading light was not sufficient to reveal the source of the clamor from the ground, and
questions rang out from the night.
"What was that?" Enin questioned.
The guards came to the ready as Sy took immediate control.
He called first to the guard perched in the tower. "Report."
"The new tower's collapsed. No sign of any other activity."
"Any fire?"
"None."
"Any street lamps out, any sections of town dark?"
The guard scanned the town spiraled out below him. "All lamps lit."
"Signal the other towers. Tell them to maintain watch."
The tower guard lit a long torch and waved it high above his head. A special sequence
of movements relayed the message.
Sy caught Enin's attention. "Is the web still in place?"
"Yes," the wizard mumbled with confusion. "It's intact. I know it is. It hasn't been
broken at all. I don't understand. I don't feel anything. There can't be any goblins around,
I don't feel them!"
"Relax!" Sy ordered. "We don't know what's out there. All we know is the tower
collapsed. It's under construction. Anything could have caused it. We have to check it
out."
He shouted out again to the tower guard. "Signal the perimeter patrol. I want them to
meet me at the new tower. Everyone else stays at their post." He then turned back to
Enin. "I want you to go back to command HQ. Assemble all reserves. Wait there until
you get a signal, or until I come back for you."
Sy watched the tower guard finish his last set of signals before giving his final orders.
"Tower guard! Keep your eyes on the clearing. Make sure no one crosses it. No one gets
to or past the wall." He then instructed the gate soldiers which numbered twice as many
as normal. "I want three men to come with me. You, you and you. The rest of you stay
here. The gate remains closed no matter what. No one gets through."
Sy did not run off in haste. He checked his weapons first, bid his soldiers to do the
same. The minor pause brought a sense of ease to those that watched him. They saw he
remained in total control. It settled their own nerves. His sword remained sheathed as he
carefully set off toward the sight of the disturbance. He stepped quickly, deliberately, but
he showed no sign of panic. He carefully eyed all passage ways he crossed. When he
spotted townspeople on their porches or worse, in the streets, he politely but firmly
ordered them back inside. When the collapsed tower came clearly into sight, he slowed
his pace.
"Fan out," he whispered and his soldiers obeyed. He stepped up to the collapsed
remains first, carefully avoiding any large pieces which might be hiding a goblin ambush.
He stood motionless for long periods as he listened for any signs of intruders. Nothing.
His eyes fell from the broken wood and swept across the immediate surroundings.
Nothing caught his attention until the perimeter patrol moved up from the west.
He chucked a heavy sigh. "I don't think there's anything here. I want to know why this
thing fell."
The guards began to inspect the tattered wood as Sy stepped up with authority to the
closest house. He knocked gently. "Sy Fenden here. No sign of a threat out here. I need to
speak to someone."
A curtain ruffled at a side window before an elderly man opened the door.
Sy spoke quickly but with a calming tone. "It seems there was an accident. Sorry to
disturb you. Did you see anything?"
The man appeared off sorts, trying to come to grips with what he might or might not
have seen. "I don't know."
"What don't you know?" Sy asked calmly.
"I'm not sure what I saw."
"Describe it."
"A couple of shadows running from the tower after it collapsed. They just
disappeared."
"Can you be more specific? Were they human, did you think they might have been
goblins?" Sy didn't want to alarm the man, but human shapes would certainly look
different than goblins. "What size were these shadows?"
"They were short, but not that short. They were big, too."
Sy held back a sigh of exasperation. "They were short, but they were big?"
"I mean they were broad. Not like goblins at all."
Sy shook his head. He thought he might have understood. "Thank you for your help. I
wouldn't worry about it. Please go back inside for now."
Sy walked wearily over to his soldiers. "It seems we have some pranksters in our
midst. Kids. I guess it is that time of year again. I would have hoped our people would
have left the mischief to the real goblins, but it looks like a couple of 'em just couldn't
resist."
A soldier inspecting a support beam interrupted Sy's explanation. "Captain? Can you
come and take a look at this?"
Sy nodded and stepped over to a thick block of wood that jutted up from the ground.
He did not like what he saw.
The soldier's explanation did little to ease any worries. "Sir, this is the main support
column of the tower. I helped place it in the ground myself. It didn't break, it was cut.
And I don't mean chopped down, I mean sliced. It looks as if one axe blade went right
through it with one swing. There's no kid in Burbon that can do that. I don't know if
there's any man that could make that kind of clean cut with one chop."
Sy saw the same thing, but he wanted to confirm it. "Are you sure? Could it have been
done with a saw?"
"There's no saw dust. And we would have heard it. The grinding from a saw would
have echoed out long before this thing fell over. No, someone was able to cut through this
thing with one axe swing."
Sy considered the power for such a feat. He thought of the shag. Only problem with
that was the man saw a couple of short shadows. Shags were never short.
"What in Godson's name is going on here?" He quickly checked his momentary lapse
of control. He spoke out commands with firm orders. "Everyone draw your swords.
Spread out and check the ground for prints. I can't tell you what to expect, just look for
anything out of the ordinary."
The soldiers stiffened with readiness. The air filled with the swish of drawn swords.
They took to a spread formation as they carefully scoured the ground. Immediately, one
guard called out.
"Over here."
Sy moved to the soldier. "The rest of you stay in position. Stand ready." Sy found the
tracks pointed out by the soldier. He found two other trails, all moving in the same
direction. He followed them slowly. They disappeared into the ground. Carefully, he
patted the soil where the tracks stopped. The dirt was loose. He took a dagger from his
waistband and pressed the fine point into the ground. The dirt gave way and revealed an
entrance to an underground tunnel. Immediately, Sy called out more orders. "I want eight
men, now!"
Eight soldiers moved up to the hole in the ground. They waited impatiently for their
orders.
Sy pointed to the hole. "Whatever wrecked our tower escaped down this hole. I don't
expect them to come back, but I want it covered. I want three of you to form a circle
around here. The other five I want circled further back around the first three. If something
tries to come out, order it to stop. If it comes out, order it to stay put. If it moves to attack,
defend yourselves. If it turns to go back down, let it. Under no circumstances are you to
go down the hole. The rest of you, come with me."

The dwarf commander waited for the return of his axe men that collapsed the tower.
The entire strike force remained as still as statues, bathed in the darkness. While the
town's attention fixed upon the confusion, the axe men returned without casualty. The
commander ordered for reports on all human guard activity. They were mixed. The
collapse of the tower had diverted attention, but most of the guards remained at their
posts. The main patrol had been dispatched to the diversion, but the tower and gate
guards remained on alert and in position. The commander grudgingly gave respect to the
human in charge.
"He is keeping his forces well deployed," he growled. "By dispatching only a small
patrol to investigate our diversion, he maintains control of key points of the town. We
must remain careful of being outflanked. Still, they watch outside the walls. They do not
know of our full presence. We must move now. To the demons with their lamp lights. If
we are spotted, we attack."
With a final grunt, the dwarf motioned for his strike force to move out. They remained
in diamond formations, but it spread to cover the full width of the wider streets which
would lead to the town center. They moved slowly, but quietly. As guard posts were
placed on the outskirts of the city and not around the town center, the attack party moved
without obstacle toward their prearranged objectives.

Sy reached command HQ before the dwarves. He found Enin waiting outside with a
compliment of thirty soldiers. They stood with swords in hand, agitated and waiting for
news.
Sy spoke directly to the wizard, moving straight to his point. "I don't think we're
dealing with goblins, serps, or shags for that matter. The tower was brought to the ground
by someone cutting the support columns, someone strong, very strong and capable with
an axe. A witness said they were short, and they disappeared into the ground. They
escaped through a tunnel, a long tunnel, one that was probably built in the time you and I
shave. You know what description that fits?"
"Dwarves," Enin replied quickly.
"Exactly. From what Ryson has told us, it has to be. That tunnel wasn't there when
construction of the tower began. No one else could dig that quickly. But now we get to
the difficult questions. Where are they, what do they want, and why did they destroy our
tower?"
Enin mulled over the points with confusion. "You said they escaped down a tunnel.
Does that mean they're gone?"
"I have no idea where that tunnel leads. They could still be inside the walls, or far
away from here. They could be above ground or still in the tunnel. I'm certainly not going
to send any men down there to check on it. That would be a death sentence. What do you
sense, anything?"
Enin shook his head. "Nothing, nothing at all."
"I don't know if that does us any good. They were inside the wall when they collapsed
the tower. Their tracks are proof of that. You were at the south gate. That's not that far,
and you didn't sense them then."
"I know. I don't know what to make of it."
"I don't either and that's why I still have to question whether they still might be within
the walls. I also have to wonder what they were doing here. Ryson told us they were
going to war with the algors. Nothing was said about possible hostilities against us."
"Maybe they are searching for allies," Enin offered. "Maybe they want our help."
"Allies don't destroy towers. Now why would they do that? I have only one possible
explanation, and it's not one I relish. That tower had no strategic significance, it wasn't
finished. The only reason I would collapse it would be to create a diversion."
"A diversion for what?"
"That's what I need to know." Sy stopped. His attention shifted to his left. "It looks
like we're going to find out. They're in the streets!"
Enin looked off down the same lit corridor. He saw the nearly indistinguishable
shapes of several short, stout men trying to evade the light. Nothing within him told him
that these invaders were anything out of the ordinary. "I sense nothing."
"I guess your magical alert doesn't work with dwarves," Sy responded before quickly
whispering orders to a nearby soldier. The soldier disappeared in the opposite direction of
the dwarves.
"What did you say to him?" Enin asked quietly.
"I told him to alert the tower and gate guards of what we've got here. We may need
reinforcements."
The dwarf commander kept his force in the same diamond formations with himself at
the point of the center group. This put him in the middle of the wide street which led
toward the human command post. His eyes, well accustomed to the dark, spotted every
human soldier ahead, regardless of the shadows of night. He counted thirty, a larger
group than he expected. He also had to walk in the open, through lit streets, but he
believed he held the advantage. The human guard held swords, the only true mistake of
his counterpart, but a grave mistake none the less. If the humans were going to face them
in hand-to-hand combat, the battle would be over before it began. His forces moved
unimpeded toward the heart of the town. This was indeed too easy.
Sy tensed with questions. Armed dwarves moving towards his position was not
something he had ever dealt with before. He knew so little about his enemy. Why are
they here? The dwarves showed no sign of stopping, and they moved with axe and mace
ready for combat. Yet, to his knowledge, Burbon had done nothing to warrant an attack
by his men other than destroy the tower.
"This is ridiculous," he muttered to Enin. "They're walking right up to us. I don't even
know what they want. I can't let them continue without knowing their intentions."
"What can you do? You're not thinking of attacking are you? You don't want to start a
war."
"Absolutely not. That's why I haven't given the order to attack. They may be here just
to talk. I guess there's only one way to find out. You men keep ready. I don't know what
may happen here."
Sy took a step forward. The dwarves were easily in shouting distance, about forty
paces away. Sy called out with authority. "Please hold your position and be identified."
The dwarves kept moving.
"I am Sy Fenden, captain of the guard. I need to know your intentions."
Not a dwarf spoke. They advanced at exactly the same pace as before.
"Your approach is threatening to us. We do not wish to fight."
The dwarf commander gave his reply in the form of a hand signal to his forces. The
back half of the diamond formation broke. The dwarves in the rear moved up to the front,
forming an angled wedge with the point directed at the human captain. They broke into a
battle run, but they were not fast by any stretch of the imagination.
Sy had more than enough time to react. His first command was a surprise to his men.
"Everyone fall back, back into HQ."
Most men moved without hesitation, but a few stared at the wedge of dwarves and
wondered why Sy had not ordered them to break the formation.
Sy repeated his order angrily. "Inside, now!"
This time, each soldier acknowledged. Quickly but orderly, the thirty soldiers filed
through the door of the brick command post. Sy waited by the door. When all his men
were inside, he threw the thick oak door close and bolted it.
"Cover the windows. If they start to come in, call out. I need ten men at the door."
Enin spoke his confusion. "What are you doing?"
"I still don't know what they want. I'm not ready to get into a battle, not just yet. I'm
giving them one more chance before they force my hand. They have axes and that's a
wooden door. If they really want to attack us, they'll chop right through it. At least then,
I'll have no other choice but to order our defense. This will also give our reinforcements a
chance to get here." Sy turned to one of the guards. "Get on the roof. Signal the towers. I
want all the tower and gate watches to divide, half stay at their post, the other half I want
here. Go!"
Outside, the dwarves were ordered to a full halt before they reached the command
building. Sy's retreat surprised the dwarf commander. He expected the humans to either
arrogantly attack the wedge or to stand stupidly about and meet their fate with blank
expressions. The command post was made of brick, and though it was not worthy of
dwarf construction, it would hold against several mace blows. The door was another
matter. It would fall quickly.
He kept his force in close formation rather than spreading out about the building. He
ordered one dwarf to quickly circle the command post. There was no other door. Since
dwarves lived underground and always considered what was over their head, the
commander then looked to the roof. He stepped back and saw the human soldier make his
signal.
"Very good," the commander mused. "He wants us to go to the door. He'll have his
men waiting there on the inside. We break through the door and fight to get through a
narrow passage way. Just when we break his force, reinforcements would hit us from
behind. He would probably sacrifice his own life in the process, but we would be
trapped."
The dwarf commander pointed to an axe man. He ordered the destruction of the door.
Inside the command post, Sy positioned himself with a contingent of ten men to meet
the dwarves right at the archway. The dwarves would only be able to fit two through at a
time. The odds would be even better for his men. They all watched the door, waited for
the inevitable.
The first blow of the axe split the door, but did not shatter it. The second sent wood
flying in every direction. Sy tensed to meet the assault, but no dwarf advanced through
the opening. He scanned what he could see through the broken space that used to be the
door. There was no sign of the dwarves. He said nothing. He pointed to a guard near a
window. He motioned for him to look outside. The guard shook his head revealing he
saw nothing. The clang of steel from outside threw Sy into even greater confusion. He
stepped carefully up to the doorway.
Outside, the dwarves were back in their wedge formation and carving through a group
of reinforcements like woodcutters through soft wood. The human reinforcements were
careless, misinterpreting the dwarves small stature as a sign of weakness. They attacked
before Sy could stop them. They believed their superior numbers and size would lead to
easy victory. They were massacred.
Sy cursed, but in that split second he managed to assess the dwarves battle strengths.
Fighting them with swords was near useless. Moving in close quarters allowed the
dwarves to use their short arms to meet the attack. The dwarf axes were breaking the
sword blades as if they were made of glass.
Sy adjusted his plans in the snap of a finger and gave his orders with the same quick
deliberation. "Grab spears and get outside."
The men sheathed their swords and quickly pulled spears from the weapon racks.
They followed Sy outside who was ordering the reinforcements to fall back. "Break off!
Break off! Don't get close to them. Spread out. Use your speed; force them to come to
you."
As more reinforcements appeared, Sy ordered them to retrieve new weapons as well.
As his force now totaled near one hundred men, all armed with spears, he ordered them
into position. "Spread out! Surround them. Don't get close. If they move up to you, jab
them in the face. Use the length of the spear. Everybody moves!"
The dwarf commander grunted with dissatisfaction. He had killed over twenty humans
in the small skirmish, but now the larger body of the force was before him. He knew his
objectives, and he would not suffer a defeat to these despicable creatures. He ordered his
force to alter their formation. They formed a tight circular cluster. He would press his
assault all night if need be. He would tire the humans down, they could not run forever,
but he received one more surprise.
Enin stood behind the spread circle of guards. His hands stretched out to the skies.
Power sparked about his wrists. The familiar white spheres returned and they flashed
with brilliance, brighter than any nearby lamplight. He whispered words to the night air.
His arms spun and the magic danced. The two intertwining spheres of energy rotated and
grew. Never before had he used so much energy, never before had he allowed so much to
flow out of his core. His knees wobbled. He fought the growing weakness in his arms.
The power grew with fury. The spheres flared and small rumbles, like distant thunder,
rolled off of his palms. With one last conscious thought, he whispered another word and
threw his arms at the dwarves.
The magic exploded from him. Guards that stood next to him were knocked off their
feet. The spheres rotated about as they merged together and formed a large translucent
dome. It fell upon the dwarves with a force that shook the ground. They were
encapsulated in a glowing but clear force field.
The dwarves angrily struck at it. Their axe blades bounced off without making the
slightest dent. They were trapped, each and every one. The dwarf commander growled.
Enin mumbled a command. "Throw your spears."
Sy immediately ordered two soldiers to do so. The spears cut through the night and
then through the force field. They penetrated the barrier with ease. One imbedded itself in
the arm of a dwarf, the other bounced off the chest plate of a second target. The force
field stood with no sign of entry holes. Sy held his men's desire to strike quickly. He
directed them to do so with patience. He also gave the dwarves an opportunity to
surrender.
"You don't have a chance. You can't get to us, but we can get to you. Drop your
weapons and surrender."
The dwarf commander finally spoke. "Never."
"Fine," Sy replied and pointed to two soldiers. They moved up carefully, picked their
targets, and let their spears fly. Two more wounded dwarves.
The dwarf commander sneered, but would not surrender. He ordered his men to dig.
Sy marveled at the speed in which they worked. Some of the dwarves had retrieved
tunneling tools from their packs while other were simply digging with their hands and
their weapons. A ditch quickly turned into a pit, which was quickly turning into an escape
tunnel. The removed dirt began to pile around the sides giving the dwarves even more
cover. Sy ordered more spears to stop them, but it only slowed them. A few more
dwarves were wounded, but soon they were out of sight and range.
Enin collapsed and the barrier dome disintegrated with his consciousness.
Sy stepped up to the dwarf-made tunnel. It extended beyond his sight. He ordered his
men to spread out around town to make sure they did not break through the surface
within the wall, but there was no further sign of the dwarves that evening.

Enin awoke on a cot in command HQ. Morning light cascaded through the shattered
front door. A cold autumn wind drifted in behind it. Sy stood at the far end of the room
looking over a map of the city. The wizard struggled to sit up. He coughed.
Sy looked over to his groggy friend. He put down the map and walked over to the
edge of the small bed.
"How are you feeling?"
"Empty. Tired." was the exhausted reply.
"Your spell saved us."
"What happened? I don't remember much."
"They couldn't break out from the barrier you cast. They ended up digging through the
ground. We inflicted a good amount of damage to them while they tried to escape. I guess
they thought they were in no shape for another round. They didn't resurface anywhere in
the city. This morning, I sent a few men down some of the tunnels. Not very far. Just far
enough to see where they go and to see if they heard anything. They all seem to lead back
out toward the hills, and I think they're all empty. I've given orders to collapse each of
them. Wouldn’t stop the dwarves the way they dig, but might slow them down a bit."
"How many men did we lose?"
Sy stiffened his back. "Thirty."
Enin's shoulders drooped.
Sy felt the same. "I know. I know. It's more than just a waste. This is all becoming a
tragedy. I keep wondering what I've done wrong, but I don't have any answers. I just
don't know what else I could have done. What's worse is I don't know how to prevent this
thing in the future. It seems these dwarves can dig tunnels from here to the hills in half a
day. How do I stop them from just popping up anywhere? The wall and the towers
helped us against the goblins, but they seem pretty much useless now. All I can think of
is to post more soldiers, but now I have to station guards in the streets as well as around
the wall. Tower guards have to watch the town as well as the clearing. I'm going to run
out of men."
"It's my fault," Enin professed. He dropped his head back into the pillow, an act of
resignation to his own self-doubts.
Sy shook his head. He had spent much of the night analyzing the events which led to
the battle. He had gone over the stationing of his soldiers, their responses to his orders,
his own tactics. He was not about to place fault with one person or with one decision.
"There's enough blame for everybody. No one individual can take full responsibility."
Enin remained withdrawn to his own conclusion. "I can. I should have sensed them.
It's been my job to warn you of attacks before they happen. Everybody counted on me.
They got right up to me and I still didn't sense them." He pounded his fist on the mattress.
"Why couldn't I feel them? They're not humans. How could they get so close? What's
wrong with me?"
Sy shook his head. "I can't answer that because I don't understand the magic in the
first place. I do understand that I should have been prepared for something like this. In
the last season we've seen more than one strange thing. Why is it so surprising to either of
us that these dwarves avoid your senses? I don't know why you weren't able to sense
them, but I know it doesn't make it your fault. It's not like you were asleep on duty. You
were out checking the streets just like me. What else could you have done?"
"I should have sensed them," Enin held to his self- incrimination.
"But you weren't able to. That's my point. What do we know of these dwarves? Very
little, I can tell you that. Maybe they just have the power to shield themselves from your
senses. It's not like it would be the only difference between them and us." Sy looked
away, looked to the broken remains of the front door. Only a small portion of wood hung
at one hinge. The rest of the shattered remains had been swept up earlier that morning.
"You saw what they were able to do. They're damn strong, unbelievably strong. Who
could have thought any of this would be happening?"
His own words rang too true in his ears. Sy shook his head as he considered all the
circumstances brought to bear upon them. The enormity of it all was almost too much for
a sane man to handle.
"Godson, this is crazy. Goblins, shags, and now dwarves. This is insanity. I keep
thinking that this is some bad dream that I'm going to wake up from. Was it so long ago
that things were normal? It's hard for me to believe my own job some time. I mean think
about it. Over the past season, the majority of my time was spent preventing goblin raids.
Goblin raids, for Godson's sake! Say something like that this time last season and I would
have been run out of town as a loon."
"You and me both. Look at me," Enin sighed. "How do you think I feel? I'm a
wizard."
"Don't knock it. I, for one, am damned thankful for what you can do. That's the only
thing that's allowed this town to survive, you and our friend the delver."
Enin gladly grasped the thread of another topic. "Speaking of Ryson, how do you
think he's doing?"
"I don't know." Sy brought a hand to his chin as he considered the delver's mission. "I
wonder. You know. I haven't thought about it until just now, but I'm beginning to think
Ryson's trip and our difficulties last night are connected in some way."
"Hmmm?" Enin puzzled.
"Well, doesn't it seem odd that the delver went out to warn algors about a dwarf war
just before we were attacked, also by dwarves."
"Other than the dwarves, what else is the connection?"
"I don't know, but it seems too much to be just a coincidence. I can't help thinking that
we're now all involved in the same thing. Maybe this war he spoke of has spread or
maybe it's something else. "
"You think Ryson might have been lured from us on purpose?"
Sy just shrugged. "I don't know what to think. If he was lured away, I have to ask why.
The dwarves might have been afraid of his speed, or his sword. More likely they might
have worried he would hear their digging before they could break through the surface.
That, at least, seems plausible. I don't know why it was an elf that came to get him.
Maybe the elf was in on it or maybe he was tricked as well. But it doesn't answer why the
dwarves attacked us in the first place. What did they want?"
"Perhaps they think we are a threat, perhaps they are just war-like creatures. I don't
know anything about the dwarves. I should have tried to read their minds." Enin began to
consider how to do such a thing. As he often did, his attention drifted from the topic at
hand to the possibility of a new spell. "I wonder how I would go about that. It seems to be
fairly common. I've heard of wizards able to cast such a spell. They can see thoughts, not
deep hidden ones, not secrets, but they can often read what is being actively considered. I
should know this spell. I know it’s just a mix of a basic sight and awareness link. Just let
your own thoughts ride the waves of the magic with a sight spell attached. Direct it at
thought rather than at seeing. I wonder if it would work on dwarves."
"You can try it the next time they show up, which I hope is never," Sy stated firmly.
Sy's voice brought Enin out of his spell searching thought. He looked about the small
cot and decided to rise. He slowly rolled on his hip and threw his legs over the side of the
mattress. He labored to his feet. His muscles did not ache, but a weakness penetrated his
limbs. He yawned heavily, drinking in the air as well as the magic held within it. The
spell he had cast drained him of most of his magical energies, his body was now in the
process of recharging. He stretched out his arms first, then his legs as he walked across
the room to the maps spread out about the table.
"What are you doing with these?"
Sy pointed to certain marked spots. "I'm trying to pick the best places to put guards in
the town. I can't put one on every street, but then again I have to cover every section. If
these dwarves can tunnel right under us, they can come up anywhere. The only other
thing I can think of is to rig the ground so it would collapse if they tunnel in certain areas.
I have some miners out looking at the tunnels before they're filled. Hopefully, they'll have
some suggestions for us."
"So, you do think they'll be back?"
"I see no reason to believe they won't," Sy admitted heavily. "The question is how to
stop them. If they send more warriors, spread them out, we'll be in a whole lot of
trouble."
"Should we ask for help?"
"You mean from Connel? I don't know how they'd feel about that. I doubt they'd send
men. If they hear about what happened to us, they'll keep every available soldier for their
own protection. They may allow us to come live with them under their protection, but I
doubt too many of our citizens will liken to that. No one wants to be a refugee. They'd
know what would be waiting for them. Tent cities, crowded unsanitary conditions. They'd
have to leave their homes here. I doubt it would happen. I think those who would leave
have left a long time ago. What they'd probably be more willing to do is enlist to help
save their homes, and that's what I'm going to offer to them. It's really the only solution I
can think of."

A goblin sentry stood uneasily within the confines of the shag's den. The serp was not
in, and thankfully neither was the shag, but they were due back any moment. The goblin
waited uncomfortably. Every instinct called for it to run from this grotto. A shag feeding
cave was no place for a goblin, but it was now the adopted home of his serp commander.
While his fears called for him to leave, a buzzing in the back of his meager brain bid him
to stay.
Footsteps, heavy thuds, announced the shag that escorted the serp. The goblin bristled
with fear. Only the sight of Sazar kept it in place. The hypnotic eyes of the serp
mesmerized the goblin, the fear of the shag drifted away into the background. It was still
present, but the goblin no longer felt the need to run for its very life.
Sazar stepped directly in front of the goblin. His snake-like eyes penetrated the
creature. "I was told you have a report for me."
The serp's voice soothed the goblin. The small creature was able to respond even as
the shag stood within arm's reach. The goblin's voice was rough and tired. "Last night
there was activity within the human compound. There were many signals from the
towers. I heard screams and sounds of battle."
The serp probed the emotions of the goblin. He cast his doubts upon the creature to
test its certainty. "I have no report of anyone entering the town last night. The gates were
closed."
"No one entered through the gates," the goblin repeated Sazar's fact.
"They fought among themselves?"
"No, they fought with dwarves."
The serp looked ever deeper into the eyes of the goblin. "You are sure of this?
Absolutely?"
"I saw the dwarves myself this morning, just before dawn. They came up from an
underground tunnel very near my position. There were many wounded. They ran off to
the woods."
"In which direction?"
"The southwest."
"They are from Dunop," Sazar said to himself. He turned from the goblin as he
reflected on his own thoughts. "I have heard rumors of rebellion in this city. Now they
attack the humans. Interesting."
Sazar turned back to the goblin. "You saw the exit but you didn't say you saw them
enter."
"No."
"They might have entered from another point. What was the first thing you saw?"
"The signals in the tower. I saw little after that. Before the signals I heard a large
crash. I am not sure what it was."
"It was their new tower," Sazar announced. "I received another report that it was
demolished last night. I already checked that for myself. I could not understand why the
humans would do such a thing. They know of the blind spot. Their wizard cast that
cursed web spell to temporarily cover it. The tower would have removed it permanently.
Now, I know why. The humans did not destroy it, the dwarves did. Probably a diversion
on their part. What happened after the signals?"
The goblin struggled for certainty of memory. "A pause, and then the sound of battle. I
could not see. I was far from the wall."
"What next?"
"Nothing. I waited for more signs. Much later I saw the dwarves surface and take off
for the woods. I came to report to you after that."
"Take me to this escape tunnel."
The goblin gladly and quickly departed the cave. To his dismay, the shag followed
Sazar and would accompany them to the spot of the tunnel. The goblin pointed to the
dwarf escape point. It was roughly covered, a quick and untidy job.
"They were in a hurry," Sazar hummed as he pressed against the covering with his
foot. Dirt gave way under the pressure and the hole opened up. "Normally, dwarves
would do a much better job in filling their tunnels. They were probably fighting time as
well as their wounds. I doubt they wanted to get caught out here in the daylight. If they
got to the trees, they would at least have cover. How many did you see?"
The goblin did not know how to count. He stammered as he tried to explain. "A small
group, not too many, but more than would be needed to scavenge food."
The serp chuckled at the goblins short-comings. "I would guess that would be around
two dozen, maybe a few more."
The goblin, not knowing what that meant, simply nodded.
Sazar looked to the wall of Burbon. "So a party of dwarves attacked the town. This
just after their delver left with two elves. I know that relations are now very strained
between the elves of Dark Spruce and the dwarves of Dunop. This is very interesting. Is it
possible the dwarves were not happy with the delver? Did they come looking for him? If
they rid the land of him, it would certainly do us a great favor. Still, there are other
opportunities at hand."
Sazar looked into the tunnel. He ordered the goblin to climb down and investigate.
The goblin showed no reservation at such a task. Goblins had no fear of small tunnels or
the dark, and the descent would allow it distance from the shag.
"Do not go far. Simply tell me what you see. How far do you think it goes?"
"I can not see, it is very dark," the reply echoed from below.
Sazar sighed. He fished a very valuable item from his pocket. A light gem, a jewel
which the dwarves used to reflect light down long tunnels. He had stolen it from one of
the air shafts of Dunop. He held it out over the tunnel entrance. The gem absorbed the
light, tightened it into a narrow beam, and finally directed it into the darkness within the
hole.
"The tunnel goes farther than the light. It goes on, very long," the goblin finally
reported.
"It probably extends all the way back to within the town." the serp observed. "The
dwarves obviously did not take the time to collapse their escape route. Come back up
here."
The goblin obeyed, left the security of the tunnel and again stood on an open hill side
within reach of the shag. It stood nervously next to the hole, though, like a prairie dog
waiting to dart back into its own tunnel if any sign of danger appeared.
Sazar virtually ignored the goblin. He looked back and forth from the tunnel to the
town of Burbon. "We can make great use of this, but we should begin work immediately.
The humans will no doubt attempt to fill in these tunnels. We can not have that, not
completely anyway. We can collapse this tunnel ourselves, just beyond the wall's edge.
They will think the dwarves were responsible and they will never find this portion of the
tunnel. We can dig our own pathways from the point of collapse later. We will not be
able to dig with the efficiency of the dwarves, but they have already performed the heart
of the task. This tunnel will serve as access to a point under their wall."
Sazar turned to the shag. He grunted and growled, made signals with his hand. He
pointed to the tunnel and then the town of Burbon. He mimicked the sight of the wall
with his hands.
The shag grunted in response. In turned toward the goblin and began to step forward.
The goblin cowered. Fear overtook it. It crouched, shaking near uncontrollable.
Sazar sighed. "Move out of his way."
The goblin's eyes shifted from the shag to the serp and back again.
The shag stopped in front of it. It stared down on the creature with lifeless eyes.
Sazar had to repeat his order. "It's not going to eat you, it's going down the tunnel.
You're in the way. Move aside."
The goblin jumped in obedience. The puffy swelled flesh around its eyes and cheeks
seemed to sag in relief.
The shag leaped down the tunnel. It was a tight fit, but the monster was able to move
along in a crouched position.
The serp pocketed the light gem. The shag would not need light. He turned to the
goblin to give his next set of orders. "Our friend is going to follow the tunnel to a point
just beyond the wall. He will collapse the tunnel at that point, breaking off the link
between this portion of the tunnel and the section that leads above ground within the
town. This tunnel will be ours, permanently. One day we will use it, but not today. I need
to find out what is going on with these dwarves. You have done well this day. I am going
to raise your rank. I want you to assemble a surveillance party. Take six goblins. You will
go into Dark Spruce. Seek out the camps of the elves. Do not engage them. Stay away
from their guards. Simply look and listen. Off with you."
The goblin ran off, filled with pride over achieving the praise, while Sazar considered
the full breadth of the situation.
"There is no doubt this is all linked together. Rebellion in Dunop. A break in relations
between the dwarves and elves. A dwarf attack on the humans after the town delver goes
off toward the southwest."
Sazar's head snapped to the southwest. He thought of what waited beyond the trees,
beyond the canyons.
"The Lacobian desert," he remarked gleefully. "The delver went with the elves to the
Lacobian to find the algors. That completes the puzzle. Those that came together for a
brief moment at Sanctum Mountain are now facing a new struggle. They succeeded in
destroying Ingar's sphere together, but now their alliance appears to be falling apart. It
will be interesting to see where this leads. Very interesting indeed."

"Retreated? They retreated?" Yave spouted a mix of anger and disbelief.
Strog grimaced. "They suffered many casualties. Two of the commandos have died
from their wounds since returning home. Two more are doubtful. If they did not retreat,
they might have all died."
"And how many casualties did they inflict?"
"The raid attack commander specifies that fifty humans were killed."
"Ha! He is lying."
"I would guess he might be exaggerating."
"Exaggerating?" Yave bellowed. "It is an out and out lie. You said before the attack
the humans had maybe a force of two hundred men in Burbon. If they killed fifty, that
was a quarter of the total force. I doubt they would have had to retreat."
Strog rubbed his hands together sullenly. "As I said, it does sound exaggerated. They
did, however, inflict at least half that many casualties. I have interviewed the individual
soldiers. They all have at least one confirmed kill. Some have two or more. I believe at
least thirty humans have been killed."
"Just thirty? There was supposed to be over one hundred." Yave turned her ire directly
upon Strog. "Was not that one of your own objectives handed down to this incompetent
commander. You believed that one dwarf could easily account for at least five human
casualties."
"The battle did not turn as I expected," Strog grumbled.
"Obviously not. And what of their other objectives? Did they destroy the human
command post? Or the weapon supplies? Did they return with the human stores of food?"
"No," Strog grimaced. "The commander focused on decimating the human guard first.
When that was not achieved, it was no longer possible to destroy the weapons or sack the
town of its food supplies."
Yave placed the blame directly and without hesitation upon the War Com. "How is
this possible? A well trained dwarf attack force defeated by an unsuspecting, untrained,
and poorly equipped human army? A very small army! Isn't that what you called them?
Isn't that why you said only a small force would be needed to attack Burbon?"
Strog, for the moment, bit back his flaring anger. He had to look away from the queen
for a moment. He stared down at the thick stone table top and made his explanation under
guarded breaths. "There were two factors I did not count on. It seems the captain of their
guard was well versed on tactics. He deployed his forces with a battle savvy I would not
have guessed a human to possess. If that were it alone, we still would have succeeded in
our objectives. According to all reports, the battle was moving in our favor, but a magic
caster intervened."
"A what?!" Yave's voice sizzled like bacon on a hot grill.
"A human wizard," Strog grunted. "I was not aware of this."
"A single wizard caused our defeat? Impossible. He would only be a novice. The
cursed energy has not been loose long enough for a single magic caster to be any threat to
us. We are resistant to magic, more so than any other race. What kind of spell could this
human wizard cast which could effect us so?"
"We are resistant to direct magic assaults only. As always, we are as susceptible to
indirect uses of the power as any other race, more so, because we can not cast spells of
our own to counteract such powers. The human wizard trapped our war party in a barrier
shell. They could not break out and were open to attack by the humans. Their captain
ordered the use of spears and coordinated the attack well. It is as it's always been, had it
not been for the magic, we would have won."
Yave growled with disgust. "I will not accept that!"
"You will have to. The magic was the only factor which was beyond our control. Look
at our other two campaigns. There were no magic casters in either case, and in each case
we were the victors. The force under my command dealt a severe blow to Connel. The
humans had no idea of what hit them. It will take them a many cycles to repair the
damage we caused. Their forces have been significantly reduced, their army is in tatters.
They would not dare attack now. What force remains will have to focus on defense. We
destroyed many of their weapons, and relieved them of large portions of their food stores.
They are no longer a threat.
"As for the elves, they are in confusion. Even now, they probably argue over why they
were attacked. The dwarf commander in charge made every attempt to conceal the origin
of his party. The elves will not know for sure if it was a force from Dunop or simply a
renegade party with no home city. Many elves were wounded, some badly, food and
wood were taken from them. Still, I doubt they can be sure it was us who attacked.
Without that certainty, they can not justify an assault of their own against us. We have
covered our flanks."
"But not with Burbon," Yave insisted with indignity.
"Burbon is no threat," the War Com insisted.
"No threat? They managed to defeat your battle force with relative ease. It is an
embarrassment."
"I can not be expected to overcome magic casters."
"Excuses!"
Strog slammed his fist down on the table. "No! Not excuses. The truth! The magic
does not serve us. The fact that it is released is a danger to us all. It is why you have the
throne and not your son."
Yave's eyes flared. "Never say that again!"
Strog did not back down. His angry stare locked with the queen's. "Then do not
question my strategies."
Yave was about to rage with acidic remarks, but Strog stopped her with a tone of
command. "Against my better judgment, we have attacked the elves and the humans.
This was your bidding, not mine. I was against this from the start, but as you are so quick
to remind me, you are the queen. You have the authority but I am the War Com. If you do
not like what is happening here, I will resign. As will the rest of my generals. We will
leave you to handle all armed conflicts yourself. I will withdraw my men from your
palace."
Yave bellowed. This brazen insignificant worm actually challenged her, defied her
authority. She growled like a hungry tiger. "You dare! They are not your men, they
answer to me. All of Dunop answers to me."
Strog again raised his fist, ready to smash it even harder against the table top. Had he
let it fly, it most likely would have broken the stone, but he held it in the air. He stood on
the brink of frustration, just as he recalled the truth of this unholy alliance. As it quelled
his own anger, he professed it to the queen. "Let us stop this game. You are queen
because of my forces. My forces remain in control of Dunop because you are queen. This
truth is undeniable. As much as both of us may wish to deny it, we need each other. If we
fail to recognize this, we will fail."
Yave grimaced. She was not as willing to concede that her authority was not absolute.
"You may fail, but I will not. It is best you remember that." Still, her voice lowered in
tone and in challenge. She may not have openly acknowledged the truth professed by
Strog, but there was a glimmer of acceptance. "You will remain the War Com and I will
remain the queen. That means you will listen to what I want, and I will accept how you
intend to bring us victory. And what I want now is to erase this embarrassment. I want
Burbon laid to waste."
Strog groaned. "That is not a sound military objective. I tell you Burbon is not a threat
to us."
For the first time in this meeting, Yave controlled her temper. She spoke with
authority, but with the coldness of an ice flow. "Anyone that threatens our independence
is a threat. The humans defeated us, they showed us to be weak. We must rectify this at
once."
"There are other things to consider." Strog gritted his teeth and held his own
impatience in check. "The algors remain in the desert. Their stronghold remains intact.
Let me deal with them first."
Yave remained defiant against this suggestion. "You defeated the algors."
"Not completely. That is what you must consider here. Many of the algors remain
alive. By ignoring them, we invite an attack on our flanks. As long as enough live to
create an army, they remain a threat."
"I don't think so. Do you really think the algors would dare to attack us? They would
be no match for us in our home tunnels." For the first time, Yave spoke the truth of her
desires, admitted the purpose of keeping the algors alive. "Besides, I want some of them
to survive, at least for a little while. I want them to think about what they've done and to
know what it has brought them. If they still linger in their mountain in the desert, let them
wait a little longer. Let them ponder their crimes and ponder the justice of the dwarf."
For a moment, the thought of the algors suffering calmed the queen. She took pleasure
in her victory. Yet, at the same time, she quickly considered her defeat, her
embarrassment. He voice grew colder still.
"It is the humans that are jubilant." She spat her judgments out like a bad taste. "The
humans of Burbon now think they can get away with this injustice. They may even now
be laughing at us. That I can not have. You speak of the algors and the threat they
represent. What of the threat of the humans? They are now filled with confidence. They
believe they can beat us. If you send your army to attack the algors, our flanks will truly
be exposed. Not to the demoralized algors, but to the cocky humans. That is the true
danger. It is my command we address this threat first."
Strog made one last attempt to sway the queen of this folly. "I am not ready for this.
To attack Burbon I will need time to develop a full battle strategy. Their captain is no
fool. He may be calling for reinforcements right now. He may find none in Connel, but
there are hundreds of human villages. I will have to assume this is so and I will have to
use the bulk of my forces. It will take time to organize them."
Yave was not the least fazed. "Take all the time you need."
"That is not what I mean. My forces are prepared to attack the algors."
"I want that to wait."
"That is not wise. To attack Burbon I will need several days."
"Then begin your preparations as soon as possible."
Strog could say nothing more. He grumbled under his breath, considered ignoring her
orders, but even if Yave wouldn't acknowledge their mutual dependence, he did. He left
her without further argument. His war boots thumped along the palace corridors as he
uneasily considered the best strategy for redeploying his troops against Burbon.

Back in the trees, back near the heart of Dark Spruce, Lief and Holli climbed, leapt,
and moved like squirrels. No longer were they slowed by the hard rock or barren
landscape of the desert, no longer were they assaulted by the oppressive daytime heat of
the Lacobian. Upon these branches, they moved with swift agility. Again, they were one
with the land; again they were at home in their surroundings. On the forest floor, Ryson
matched and surpassed their speed. He remained at ground level, but he was equally
pleased to be free from the dangers of the desert wasteland. He glided over fallen trunks
and jutting roots as he circled below the limbs and branches. He searched diligently for
goblins and river rogues, but he found only the pleasing sight of peak autumn leaves.
Unfortunately, no blessing of the trees could remove their true troubles. Despite the
welcome sight of the surrounding forest, the thought of the algor crisis remained
paramount. Their grim expressions hid their joy, and the cool shade of this autumn day
could not erase the image of what was to come. The war was escalating to a point far
beyond their expectations. Even at this very moment, the algors were carving a massive
army of sand giants and preparing to animate the legion with magic. There was little the
three could do now, nothing else but return to the elf camp and warn others of this
growing insanity.
Once in the trees, Holli had relaxed her guard, equally joyous to be far from the
threats of novice wizards and sorcerers. Within the forest, she relied more upon her new
found magical perceptions, and she remained untroubled for most of the return journey.
Her ease, however, dissipated upon their first pass of an elf guard perimeter.
Her fellow guards reported the area safe for travel, but an angry, nervous edge painted
their words. They said little, simply reported on the current conditions. There were no
signs of any true danger, only small scavenging groups of goblins. To Holli, the
perimeter guards appeared excitable beyond the point of such inconsequential
circumstances. She sensed their unease and pressed for greater detail.
The guards hesitated at first. It was not their place to reveal critical events, even to
members of their camp. They were guards not elders. Such information should be passed
on by the camp leader or his council. It was up to the elder to interpret and to explain, but
this thought did little to strengthen their own security. That, and the fact that Holli was a
well respected member of their own elite, forced their tongues. They spoke hurriedly of
an attack by the dwarves, elf casualties, and a loss of food.
Lief cursed.
Holli went rigid. She immediately returned to a state of alert which matched her
caution when they traveled through the desert. Her eyes swept across the forest, her
attention directed at ground level.
Ryson stayed upon the forest floor, constantly circling the elves from underneath. He
heard the reports from the elves as they spoke. He turned vigilant for shifting soil or deep
vibrations from below which might reveal dwarf tunneling.
Lief asked as to the elf response to the attack. He was not surprised at the answer.
Nothing. Apparently, the camp elder was attempting to uncover the reasons behind the
attack.
Lief cursed again.
Pressed by the unsettling news, the three quickly moved on. As they entered the elf
camp, a hodgepodge of small fires and food stores, Holli and Lief dropped from the trees
to join the delver on the ground. Ryson followed the two elves to the opposite edge of the
camp. Several others were caught up in a lively debate. They stood about one male elf,
whose head shifted from one elf to another. It appeared as if this central figure was trying
to listen to each muddled opinion, but was failing miserably. His expression revealed
pained confusion.
"As expected," Lief grumbled. He stepped up to the assemblage of elves.
Holli held back at the edge of the group, but motioned for Ryson to move up. She
remained outside the crowd. Her eyes swept across the tree-lined ground, but she kept an
awareness of the conversation.
Ryson stepped up to Lief's side. His attention centered upon the elf in the middle. He
wondered why this individual was the center of attention. He looked lost.
The other elves came to a curious quiet. They waited impatiently for someone to take
the lead. There were a few uncomfortable coughs.
Lief spoke first. He nodded to Ryson. "This is the delver Ryson Acumen. I am sure
most of you remember him."
Most nodded with respect and acknowledgment.
Lief continued. He presented the confused elf to the delver. "Ryson, this is Petiole. He
is the new camp elder."
Ryson hid his surprise. He remembered when he first met the previous camp elder,
Mappel. Mappel commanded respect with his very presence. He demanded order, and
other elves waited for his opinion. Ryson doubted that Mappel would have ever let such a
disorderly assemblage occur among his people, but the delver buried any comment. He
would not allow his surprise to become evident. He bowed slightly, but respectively to
Petiole.
In that moment of silence, the delver drank in a wealth of information. There was a
marked sign of age on this elf, with more hints of worry than wisdom. The elf stood with
uncertainty, fumbled both with his hands and his feet. His eyes darted about like a
nervous thief. He constantly shifted his weight as if he wished to be somewhere else.
Most of all, he did not know what to say to the delver. He stood nearly tongue-tied as he
mouthed a simple greeting.
"Welcome delver."
The uncertainty was even more evident in his voice.
Lief with a shrug of impatience immediately took the reigns of the discussion. He was
not an elder, but his participation in the battle at Sanctum Mountain brought him far more
respect. He was as much a part of elflore as any of the legends. Though he did not have
the true authority to rule, he spoke with the tone of command. His eyes narrowed upon
Petiole.
"What has happened here? We have heard of a dwarf attack."
"Yes." Petiole battled to sound as forceful as Lief. He failed. Confusion and
uncertainty coursed through his words. "Two nights ago, a party of twenty dwarves broke
through the ground behind our perimeter of guards. To their credit, our guards spotted
them immediately, but they were too far away to immediately stop the assault. The
dwarves attacked those upon the ground. They stole food and wood and disappeared back
into their tunnel."
"How many elves were hurt?" Lief asked angrily.
"About two dozen."
"How many dead?"
"Four," Petiole admitted reluctantly.
Grief driven fury swept across Lief's face. He dropped his head to gather himself.
Petiole simply waited.
It seemed strange to Ryson, Petiole answering questions like a subordinate. It
continued.
Lief pressed through his grief. He inhaled deeply before questioning Petiole further.
"How much food and wood did they take? Will we face shortages?"
"I'm not sure."
Lief showed his impatience. "Well, what did they take?"
Petiole shrugged.
Tuber Berisom, the elf in charge of storing the harvested food, spoke up to answer.
"They took little that was of any real long term value to us. They took mostly fruits.
Berries, crab apples, pears. Not much more. Most of that would have spoiled anyway.
They did not find our supplies of nuts, salts, and dried crops. We can increase our fruit
picking to the east to make up for what was lost."
For the first time, Petiole spoke without reservation or hesitation. He stared angrily at
Tuber. He spoke not with the diplomacy of a leader, but with the hostility of an insulted
adolescent. "I have not made that decision yet."
Instantaneously, the order of the meeting fell apart. Petiole began to scold many of the
elves as they voiced their displeasure with him.
"What else can we do?" Tuber asked with a temper. "We've lost food. We have to
make up for it."
"We won't starve if we don't," Petiole responded angrily. "You yourself said so. You
said we have plenty of food. Do you now change your opinion?"
"We have enough food to get us through the dormant season. That is what I said. I did
not infer that we should not make up for what we have lost."
Other elves began to bicker about the amount of available food. Ryson was near
shock. If this was the council of elders, they were acting like children. They insulted each
other with disrespect. They were obviously incensed at the dwarf attack, and they were
taking it out against each other. It was embarrassing for leaders to act in such a fashion,
and Petiole raged with the best of them.
"What if the dwarves come back?" The lead elf challenged.
"What if they do?" Tuber countered with no greater dignity.
"They'll just take it again," Petiole answered, stubbornly holding his ground. "I will
not allow the work of this camp to go to waste. I must direct the activities of this camp
with regard to the consequences. If we are to restock our food supplies, we must first
come up with a way to protect them."
A decorated guard commander immediately jumped into the fray. "That is what I have
said, and you haven't yet given me a decision on my plans. We can't just let the dwarves
step all over us. We have buried our own dead because of their unwarranted attack. We
can not just stand here and wait for another. If you allow me to teach those dwarves of
Dunop a lesson, we will not have to worry about them coming back to steal our food."
"We have no way of knowing who it was that attacked us," Petiole remarked as if
insulted.
"Of course we do."
"No we don't. They could have just been renegades."
Holli spoke from the rear. She did not step up to the others. She simply let her voice
carry over theirs.
"There can be little doubt as to who attacked us. Yave sent her warriors from Dunop
and I believe I know why. The delver, Lief and I, we were set upon in the desert by a
dwarf war party. They wore the markings of Dunop soldiers. They believed us to be spies
out to assist the algors. They attacked us, but the delver proved too agile for them.
Obviously, the party returned to Dunop and informed the queen of what happened. Based
on what we already know of her, it is not unreasonable to believe she ordered an attack in
response to that skirmish. It all fits together, especially now if she believes we have allied
ourselves with the algors."
"I did not know of the skirmish," the elf commander replied quickly before anyone
else could speak, "but I already stated that Yave was the only dwarf that would order
such an attack."
"But these renegades did not wear the markings of Dunop," Petiole insisted. "We can
not be sure of this."
"I think we can," Holli replied with as much respect as she could muster. "If the
dwarves had sent a full-fledged army, they would have displayed their Dunop arms with
egotistical pride. From what you have already said, however, they only sent twenty. They
would probably want us to believe it was simply a raiding party of renegades, to create
the confusion we have now. It fits together."
"Why would they do such a thing?"
Holli offered a possible theory. "The full compliment of their forces may be
elsewhere. They may be focused upon the algors, or they may have another target."
The words struck the delver like a hammer. He gasped with dread and uncertainty.
"Burbon!"
Holli did not wish to exaggerate the delver's fears, but she could not disagree with the
possibility. She simply nodded.
Ryson stared at the elf guard. He did not wish to accept his own thoughts, but they
crashed upon him with grave savagery. "If Yave decided to attack here to get even with
you, she would have been just as upset with me. She would have..."
He did not wait to finish his sentence. He flew from the elf camp, ignoring the calls of
Lief and Holli.

Ryson reached the walls of Burbon to find it safe in Sy's hands. The guard at the gate
informed the delver of the dwarf attack. There were casualties among the soldiers, but no
civilians were hurt.
Torn between relief and dread, Ryson first went to the Borderline Inn. His fears would
not be completely quelled until he saw Linda safe and well.
The inn was empty, not a single patron. As he shut the door behind him, the click of
the latch snapped the silence like the crack of a whip, but only for a heartbeat. The quiet
rushed back upon him. The tavern area, which was normally full of life, welcomed him
with only ghosts of memories. The floor boards creaked ever so slightly under his feet.
Normally, such a sound would easily have been drowned out by conversation, music,
even laughter. Not today. The creak of the wood played like a symphony. Ryson looked
to the bar, now just a silent and lonely block of intricately designed architecture. The
stools waited like sleeping sentinels or dead soldiers. A grave yard.
Ryson's heart raced. No civilians had been hurt, but where was Linda. "Hello? Linda?"
He heard her call from the back, from the kitchen.
"Ryson?"
The door to the back swung open with the force of a hurricane. Her eyes fell upon
him, swelling instantly with tears of relief. She ran to him. She threw her arms around
him, held him with every force of her being.
"Oh Ryson! I was so scared. I didn't know ..." the rest of her words were muffled, her
face pressed in his chest.
Ryson returned her hold. He stroked her hair. He wanted to comfort her, but he was
overcome with the same sense of relief. He did not know what he would have done if she
was not there to greet him. He breathed heavy, freeing the tightness in his body.
"It's alright. Everything's alright."
They stayed together for long moments. Neither of them spoke. Finally, Linda
released her iron strong hold. She stepped back and she wiped the tears from her eyes.
She quickly moved around the bar and got a towel to wipe her face. She laughed a little,
embarrassed by her own emotional outburst. The relief of seeing Ryson fueled her joy,
and she laughed a little harder.
Ryson smiled. "I guess we both have stories to tell, huh?"
"Are you hungry?" she was finally able to get out.
"No, I'm alright. Maybe just some water."
Linda got two cups. They both took long gulps, trying to swallow the remnants of
their emotions.
Ryson took another look around the inn. His delver curiosity began to chew at him.
"What happened here? Why is this place so empty?"
Linda appeared to shiver. "We were attacked again, but not by goblins."
Ryson helped her out. "I know. It was dwarves. I was afraid of that. What have you
heard?"
"They dug tunnels under us. They attacked the command post. They killed a lot of
men." Linda shuddered. She had to stop, take another drink.
"That's alright. Don't go into that. I'll get that from Sy. What's happening now? Why's
the place so empty?"
"They're training," Linda forced out.
"Who's training?"
"Most everyone. Sy put out a request. He said he needed volunteers to help fight. It
was either that or leave for the protection of Connel. No one wants to leave their homes.
Everyone agrees we have to stay and fight. Even I wanted to join. Sy wouldn't let me. He
said it would interfere with your thinking. He couldn't have that. He said the people of
this town would need you thinking straight more than they would need me."
Ryson did not know how to respond. He was thankful for what Sy had done. He did
not want to worry about Linda. He spoke his thoughts openly. "I'd rather you didn't put
yourself at risk. In all honesty, I don't know what's going to happen next."
"That's what scares all of us," Linda admitted.
"Can you leave," Ryson pressed, "can you lock this place up for a while? I want you
to come with me. I'm going to see Sy. I want you to hear what's going on."
Linda waved to the empty room. "I don't think that's a problem."
Linda and Ryson moved quickly to the command post, past hundreds of civilians
training in the streets. Sergeants of the guard spoke respectful but forceful to them all,
whether they were merchant or mid-wife. This was no game. Their lives were at stake
and each face showed it. Grim and determined, fearful but angry; the townspeople
followed the training without objection.
The scene was powerful. Men and women of all ages, learning to use weapons of
death and destruction, willing to cast aside their normal lives to protect their homes. They
disregarded their status as civilians, there were no more civilians. They were all soldiers,
soldiers that had to learn quickly. They made mistakes, and when they did they cursed.
There was no joking, no playful laughter. This was life, and death. They came together
under the watchful eyes of the sergeants; they put aside any past differences. For this
moment, there was unity in purpose and in spirit.
Ryson guided Linda into the guard headquarters, into Sy's office. He offered greeting
to Sy and Enin.
Sy could not have been happier, and he made no attempt to hide it. "Thank Godson."
"Godson?" Ryson quickly responded with a smile. "I didn't know you followed that
faith."
Sy smiled broadly. "I'll believe anything that brings you back to us. Do you know
what's going on here?"
Ryson's own smile evaporated. "Most of it. I know the dwarves attacked. Tell me
about the particulars."
Sy poured over each detail, hoping the delver might find some understanding in this
madness. Upon finishing his description, he asked for enlightenment. "Do you know
what's going on here?"
Ryson gritted his teeth. "I'm afraid I do. It seems you were right. You yourself said
that wars often spread. I guess you can say that most of this is my fault. The elves and I
stumbled across a dwarf war party in the desert. They called us spies and attacked us. We
beat them off but they must think we have allied with the algors. They also attacked the
elf camp in Dark Spruce."
Sy did not want Ryson to take and fault in this matter. He wanted the delver's head
clear. "You can't blame yourself. You said you had a responsibility to warn the algors. No
man can be faulted for living up to his responsibilities and nothing can justify the attack
on my men."
Ryson revealed the full merit of his own disappointment. "I'm afraid I failed with the
algors as well. I was too late in getting there. The dwarves had already attacked. The
algors suffered heavy losses."
"I'm sorry to hear that," Sy offered.
Ryson did not know what else to say.
Sy turned to his obligation of protecting the people. He focused on obtaining more
information. "I need your help. I need to know what you think is going to happen next. In
all honesty, I have no idea what to do. The way these dwarves can tunnel leaves us with
hundreds, maybe even thousands, of blind spots. The wall in useless. They can attack any
part of the city at any moment. I have my soldiers spread so thin I had to ask for
volunteers."
"I saw. Quite impressive."
Sy nodded with respect for the people it was his duty to protect. "Not surprising.
These people really have no other place to go. None of us do. It helps, but only to a
degree. I can't say what they'll do if they face a real battle. I need more experienced
soldiers. I sent a messenger to Connel. She hasn't returned yet. I can't count on it until I
know for sure. For now, I have to rely on what I've got. Anyway, you've told me why
they've attacked, I need to know if they'll attack again."
Ryson considered the point. The thought was not pleasant. "I don't know. If I had to
guess, I would probably say yes. You defeated them. I doubt that is sitting well with
them. They seem to be such a proud race. Any loss is just going to make them angry. I
would think they would try again."
Sy frowned, but revealed his agreement. "That's my thought, but there is still so much
I don't know. How large of a force will they send against us? What kind of weapons will
they use? Will they tunnel again? And most importantly, when will they attack?"
"I can't answer any of those questions. The only thing I can say is that I don't think
dwarves are very patient. If Yave is attacking us out of anger, she'll probably waste little
time, but I can't guarantee that she won't wait."
"Damn," Sy grumbled. He looked at Ryson with fading hope. "There are other
problems as well. Enin here can't detect them. For some reason, they can get close and if
he closed his eyes he wouldn't be able to tell them apart from our regular citizens."
"It bothers me greatly," Enin confirmed what Sy was saying. "I have spent much of
the past day trying to figure out why. Even now, I don't understand it."
"The dwarves are very resistant to the magic," Ryson explained. "Holli, the elf guard,
she explained that to me before. That's probably why you didn't sense them."
"Resistant?"
"They don't store it, they have a hard time using it, and apparently, spells are not very
effective against them."
Enin filled with relief. "It wasn't me? There wasn't something happening to me?"
"No."
"That doesn't really help us, Enin." Sy sounded upset with the wizard's show of solace.
"We still won't get any early warning on them." The captain turned back to the delver.
"I've put men at posts at different intersections around the town. I'm using them as early
warning. I've also had some miners dig some warning traps. They tell me if the dwarves
dig underneath them, they'll collapse. I don't know how much faith to put into that,
though. They seem like they would work, but these dwarves can dig like nothing else I've
ever seen. Do you have any suggestions?"
"Not really? I..."
Enin did not let him finish. "Something's approaching the wall." He ran from the
office, ran outside into the open air.
"Great," Sy grumbled. "What now?"
He, Ryson and Linda followed the wizard. They looked to him expectantly.
Enin faced the south gate. A smile crossed his lips. "Elves. Two of them. They are
approaching the wall."
Understanding washed over the delver.
"It's probably Lief and Holli. I left them rather abruptly," Ryson admitted.
Sy turned to a soldier keeping guard at the door. "Signal the south gate. There are two,
uh, individuals approaching. Let them enter and instruct them to come here."
"Should I go meet them?" Ryson questioned.
"I'd rather you didn't," Sy confessed. "I'd like to hear everything they have to say for
myself. If you go off on your own, I might miss something important."
"Fair enough, but we should meet them here, outside. They probably won't like being
cramped up in your office."
Sy frowned with uncertainty. He spoke to the delver almost guardedly. "Before they
get here, I have some questions. You said the elves were attacked as well as us. What did
they say about the attack?"
Ryson offered the little information he had overheard. "It was a small raiding force,
about twenty dwarves. They had some casualties, not as bad as here, but they did take
some supplies."
Sy pressed for more detail about a possible elf response. "What did they say they were
going to do about it?"
"They were arguing that point when I left. I think some of them wanted to attack
Dunop. It's just like you said, this war is spreading, and I don't know where it's going to
end." Ryson paused to look down the main street that led to the south. His sharp eyes
picked up the elves being escorted by two guards before anyone else could see them.
"Here they come now."
Sy called for Ryson's undivided attention. "One more thing before they get here. I'm
going to talk openly to these two. If I say anything which bothers you in any way, speak
up. I have no idea of what I'm dealing with here. I'm going on instinct alone. I need any
help you can give me."
"I don't know much more than you," Ryson warned.
Sy shook his head. "That's nonsense and you know it. You've dealt with elves before.
You've fought along side them. I can't say that. Don't worry about hurting my feelings
and don't be damned humble. I'm near in the dark here."
"Alright." Ryson could not ignore his plea, and could say nothing else.
The elves approached. Holli surveyed the area, summed up each human guard that
stood near. She showed no sign of agitation, only careful analysis of her surroundings.
Lief did not appear happy.
"That was not wise," the elf admonished the delver. "You ran out of our camp without
a thought to the threats in the forest. You ran off before you could voice your own
experiences in the desert."
Ryson spoke out defensively. "I thought Burbon might have been attacked. It was. I
had to get back here as soon as possible. You would have done the same."
"Without escort? Alone? I don't think so."
"There was no time for that. I had to move fast."
"Fire upon your impatience," Lief cursed
Holli spoke softly but firmly. "There is no cause for that, Lief. What's done is done."
Ryson thanked the elf guard and quickly introduced her to those around them.
Holli found each individual interesting in their own right. She could sense the strong
magic in Enin. She recalled Lief's description of the wizard. It did not surprise her now
that he cast white magic. One day he would be a powerful wizard, perhaps stronger than
any other, this she could not deny. Had it not been for the aura of pureness around him,
this encounter would have given her nightmares.
Linda had no magic in her, none whatsoever, and that was also fascinating. It went
beyond normalcy for resistant humans, even beyond the dwarves resistance to the energy.
Even most dwarves Holli met touched the magic to a least some degree, but this human
woman seemed to almost repel it, to shed it from her as if it was an unwanted and weak
virus.
As for Sy, he sparked the most curiosity in the elf guard. He was obviously a soldier, a
leader of this human army that was even now training in the streets. She wondered about
his skills, his experiences. She would have liked to speak with him alone, to learn
everything he could teach her. She was not so arrogant to believe that only the elf guards
new proper battle tactics. She needed only look around to see the walls and towers as
well as the placement of guards to know that this man had wisdom in the ways of war and
defense. She asked openly of the training exercises.
"You have many learning to fight and Ryson spoke of a dwarf raid. Have you been
attacked?"
Sy spoke without hesitation. He spoke openly and with all honesty. "We were attacked
by dwarves that tunneled under the wall. We weren't ready for that. We lost about thirty
soldiers. Our forces were deployed for other threats. I have these people training because
I don’t have enough experienced men to cover the town. The truth of the matter is I’m
spread to thin, not something I would like to admit. I'm telling you this because I accept
you as an ally, a friend. In all honesty, we need all the friends we can get. It's been hard
enough for us to deal with the constant threat of goblin raids. I have to tell you, I'm afraid
this town is on the thread of extinction. If I can't count on you to treat us as an ally, I don't
think there is any hope for us."
He looked to Holli, looked to her for a soldiers promise, a word of good will that
would go beyond negotiated treaties. She did not disappoint him.
"The elves do not feel threatened by the humans. We have no animosity to you or your
town. We can be friends, we need to be friends."
"That's good to hear, because another enemy I don't need."
Sy looked to Ryson, looked to see if he said anything he would later regret. The delver
simply nodded and smiled.
Lief, however, returned his wrath to the delver. "And as friends, we should not run out
on each other. Your word was needed."
"I thought I was needed here."
The response did little to alleviate the elf's anger. Ryson saw this clearly, and he
attempted to assuage his friend's anger.
"Maybe I can go back," he replied somewhat apologetically.
"It is too late for that. Holli and I recounted our experiences. Still, your words might
have swayed Petiole. Whether you like to accept it or not, you are a part of elflore now.
Your opinion would have been highly regarded."
Sy forced the conversation back to his own needs. "I'm not sure what's going on with
your camp, but I can tell you that I need the delver here. Of that I'm sure. That may be the
only thing that I'm really sure of. I'm worried the dwarves may come back at any
moment. For the most part, we were lucky."
"What do you mean you were lucky?" Holli asked with interest.
Sy detailed the battle and the retreat of the dwarves. "We were lucky Enin was here. I
don't now how many of my soldiers would have died if we had to battle them without
him." Sy could not help but notice the expression on Holli's face. It exposed her
reservations with the victory. Sy narrowed on this, demanded an explanation. "That's not
the expression of someone that's just heard good news. Something about what I said is
bothering you. What is it?"
"Your victory in that battle may cost you much in the future," Holli responded like
one steel nerved officer speaking to another. "If our suspicions our correct, the dwarf war
party was sent here to punish you. You did not let them succeed."
"Was I suppose to?"
"No. You were put in a no-win scenario. No soldier would allow an invader to attack
without attempting to defend. You acted as any true leader would. But that won't change
what will probably happen next. Not only were you not punished, you forced a retreat
and inflicted casualties. The dwarves will find this an embarrassment. They will most
likely attack again, but next time they will come in greater numbers and they will spread
themselves in formations which will keep your wizard from trapping them again."
"Damn!" Sy quickly looked out across the streets, looked to the civilians now training
to be soldiers. "They won't be enough, will they?"
"I don't think so," Holli responded with honesty that would befit an ally. "But do not
yet lose your faith. There are other aspects of this war to consider. The dwarf army may
never reach you."
Both Ryson and Sy spoke at the same time. "Why not?"
Holli hesitated at first. There was something immediately upon her lips, but she did
not speak of it. Instead, she referred to knowledge that was already Ryson's. "Ryson
knows of the sand giants. The algors intend to send them upon the dwarves. Such an
event may forestall any attack upon you."
"Wait a minute," Ryson interrupted. "I thought it would take time for the algors to
prepare the stone and to capture the magical energy needed to cast the spells. I didn't
think the sand giants would be ready for another several days."
"That is probably true, "Holli admitted, "but we also don't know when the dwarves
will plan a second attack against this town."
"Hold on. Hold on," Sy demanded. "You're going way beyond my comprehension
here."
Ryson explained as quickly as possible.
Sy knew not to doubt, even if the thought of giants carved from sandstone and
animated by magic seemed beyond sane thinking. He simply accepted the facts as
revealed by the delver. The algors intended to send an army of sand giants against
Dunop. If so, that would certainly occupy the dwarves if not destroy them completely.
Still, Sy had to speak of his own interpretations. "If I understand what you're saying, it's
possible that these sand giants may take care of the dwarves for us. If that's the case, our
town may yet be safe. But I have to offer you two possibilities. What if the dwarves
return to the desert and defeat the algors before these sand giants are created?"
"That is certainly a consideration," Holli conceded.
Sy continued. "That means the dwarves may still show up here. It'll just take them
longer to regroup their army. The other possibility is that the sand giants don't reach
Dunop until after the dwarf army attacks us. You said the sand giants will use the tunnels
constructed by the dwarves as the means for them to reach Dunop. If the dwarves did a
good job destroying those tunnels, it may take the sand giants days even weeks before
they reach their target, plenty of time for them to deal with us."
"That is also possible."
Sy pointed out the obvious. "Then, in all honesty, the odds remain high that the
dwarves will still attack here, and I don't know if I can stop them."
"There is one other factor you are overlooking," Lief said abruptly. He paused for a
moment as everyone turned to look at him. Holi grimaced briefly but then nodded her
head. Lief would have made the announcement with or without her approval, but he was
glad to have it. "You are unaware of what Petiole, the leader of my camp, has decided.
This decision makes an attack against your town very unlikely.” He exhaled deeply as if
the next words were not welcome to his lips. “He plans to unleash shadow trees upon
Dunop."
The mere mention of shadow trees caused Ryson to shiver. He recalled the power of
these mutated creations, how they thrived in darkness and consumed all living things. He
had dealt with them in Sanctum and he still recalled their nightmare. Shadow trees were
beyond horror, they were living darkness and the thought of their existence in Dunop was
stifling. He thought of the lifeless evils growing in the dark caverns of the dwarf city. The
hideous creations would overwhelm the city, consume every inhabitant. Dunop would be
destroyed, of that there was no question. He then considered the sand giants. They would
clear tunnels as they sought the dwarves, make paths for the shadow trees to grow and
reproduce. They would thrive in the darkness and they would spread, perhaps through
every underground city in the land. Maybe it was not Burbon that faced extinction, but
the dwarves.

Sazar strolled the hilltops. His goblin minions had informed him of the return of the
delver, as well as the arrival of the two elves shortly thereafter. He looked to the sun,
estimated the time to its departure from the sky. He watched the passing of only a few
clouds. A dry wind blew from the west. This would be a good night to attack.
He considered his advantages. The humans had indeed relaxed their watch upon the
clearing. In fact, it appeared as if they now all but ignored the threat of a goblin raid. The
scouts by guards on horseback through the tall grass had ceased. The number of armed
humans at the gates dwindled. The town as a whole appeared more concerned with a
greater problem. They might be more anxious over another dwarf attack, but it was not a
wise idea for them to turn their backs on him.
There was also the consideration of diversion. The delver had returned, along with the
elves. What news did they bring with them? Something important enough to cause great
commotion? Probably. The humans would be even more absorbed in other matters. Their
attention was divided.
The shag had been successful in saving the tunnel for him. A goblin raiding party
would not even have to pass the clearing. They could get behind the wall with ease,
maybe even reach the stores of weapons and food without being spotted. Supplies could
be transferred through the tunnel. Even the danger of a costly retreat vanished.
If ever there was a time for a successful goblin raid, this was the night. Sazar had the
means and the opportunity. It was almost as if Burbon was welcoming him. This was no
trap, no false illusion. Food and supplies waited for his taking. With a little luck, he and
his goblins would be set for the entire dormant season. Now is the time, now we should
raid.
The order was on his lips. All logic pointed to this one course of action. All that was
necessary was for him to speak the command, but Sazar remained silent.
He paced the hilltop, always looking to the shadow of Burbon in the distance. Just as
his snake-like tail slithered through the grass behind him, images of greater glory
wavered through his thoughts. A more enticing opportunity was at hand, he could taste it.
A war. There was nothing firm, no strong evidence, but he could not shake the belief that
it was imminent.
The participants were certainly in place. The elves, the dwarves, the algors; all signs
pointed to escalating tensions. The invasion by the dwarves on Burbon certainly indicated
hostility, but Sazar was quick to remind himself that small skirmishes did not always lead
to all out war. Nothing fit perfectly, but nothing contradicted his theory, either.
Coincidence would only go so far to explain what he already knew. Then, there were the
rumors. They were strong, too strong to ignore. Rebellion in Dunop and strained relations
between elves and dwarves.
The rumors were supported by fact. The dwarves had attacked the humans. This was
not a sign of healthy relations. Elves from Dark Spruce were now speaking with the
humans, not something they did in the past. Yes, there was tension.
A few questions bothered him. Where did the algors fit in all of this? Why did the
delver and the elves head off into the Lacobian desert in the first place? And why did no
algors come back? How far would the hostilities go? Which races would be allies, which
would be enemies, and which would try to remain neutral?
The serp stalked the tall grass as if he was hunting rodents. His mind, however, was
firmly set upon the puzzle. He wanted a war, but should he count on it? He had before
him a known opportunity, a chance to obtain much needed supplies. He did not wish to
let the chance of a successful raid slip through his reptilian fingers, but how much greater
were the rewards in the event of a larger conflict?
He considered his quandary. Perhaps, he should call for the raid anyway. He was not
really worried about any goblin casualties. He could always find replacements. Goblins
were as plentiful as weeds. He might be able to raid Burbon and still enjoy the later
opportunities of war.
Still, he did not want to be a factor in the culmination of the coming conflict. He did
not want his decisions to change the course of events. In all honesty, he wanted the war
more than he wanted this single raid. He would have both if he could, but he would not
risk the one for the other. That is where he needed to remain careful.
If only he knew for sure, if only he had more information. He would bless the goblin
that could bring him such intelligence.
As if an answer to his own twisted prayers, the goblin he promoted and sent to Dark
Spruce came into his view. The goblin labored through the tall grass and up the hill. It
was out of breath, but eager to speak.
"Sazar, sir. My party has returned. We have found what you wished to know. The
elves were indeed attacked by the dwarves."
The serp's eyes gleamed. He appeared like a cobra ready to strike. "You are sure?"
"We are sure," the goblin exhaled heavily, still trying to catch its breath. "We did not
see the battle, but we overheard elf guards. There was an attack, but they do not know
where the dwarves came from. A few argued that they had to come from Dunop."
"Of course they came from Dunop," Sazar said with near glee. "They attacked the
humans, and now, also the elves. This is too good to be true. Do you understand what this
means? Don't answer. Of course you don't. Fortunately for you, I do. A skirmish between
the humans and the dwarves may not lead to anything more than confusion. The humans
would not know how to respond. They worry more about protecting their town. They
would not seek a counter offensive. But the elves, they are a different story. They will not
simply forget this. They will want to respond. There has always been tension between the
elves and the dwarves. This will be the spark to a greater fire. There will be more attacks,
greater tension, escalating hostilities."
Sazar began to pace the hilltop again. This time, however, he appeared like a child at a
birthday party; excited, gleeful, impatient, wondering what present to open first.
"The two elves came back with the humans. That means that all three races will be
involved. The algors did not show. That may mean they wish to remain neutral. Still,
conflict between the others affords us so many opportunities." He turned back to the
goblin. "Truly, this is a time for us all to rejoice. We have just what we want. War."
A full-fledged war. Music to his ears. The potentials of such a proposition opened
before him. His goblins would be like vultures waiting near the edges of every battle,
ready to steal weapons from the dead and defeated, ready to hunt the wounded for food
and gems or gold. There would be a need for spies. The humans would pay for
information. There would be a need for assassins. How much would the dwarves pay for
the services of his shag?
This news also brought an end to his languishing over the raid. His decision was
made. There really was no choice. If war was possible, he should hold off his goblins.
War was a tricky thing. It started and stopped over the smallest incidents. There would
also be another time, another night for a raid. Perhaps not as perfect as this one, but he
would find another moment. After all, the tunnel would still be there and Burbon wasn't
going anywhere. The raid simply had to wait for another time. Too bad.

"I can't allow this. This has to be stopped." Ryson was more than adamant, he was
blazing with dissent. The memory of the shadow trees invoked his passions. He narrowed
his focus directly upon Lief. "You were with me, down at the bottom of Sanctum. You
saw those things. You can't let this happen again. They're a nightmare."
Ryson's voice trembled. To him, it was more than a bad dream. The shadow trees were
real, and they waited in the darkness of his memories. His recollection of this horror was
as crisp as a dried leaf. It would never leave him. The delver spent many a sleepless night
fighting off the memory of the terror in the dark.
"I don't care what the dwarves did. Nothing would justify this. If the seeds are dropped
on Dunop, the trees will kill all the dwarves. The young, the old. The innocent! Everyone
down there."
"It was not my decision," Lief replied. His expression was colored with the gloom of
his own memories of the monstrosities.
"Godson! It's everybody's decision. Yours, mine, everyone's. We either allow it, or we
don't"
Linda was shocked by his outburst. "Ryson. Try to clam down. I don't think he wants
this to happen any more than you do."
Ryson could not, would not, calm his emotions. "It's his camp. He can stop it. He's
respected there."
Holli spoke somberly. "He tried. He could not sway the opinion of the camp leaders.
They see Yave as a threat to our existence."
"But you're not just putting an end to Yave, you're putting and end to Dunop. Godson,
maybe even worse. Don't forget the algors and what they're planning. What do you think
is going to happen when the sand giants start breaking through the tunnels? They're going
to open more paths underground to get to the dwarves. The shadow trees will spread,
they’ll spread into the desert and right under the algors. How many will die? This is
beyond not being right, this is criminal."
Holli reminded him of who he was shouting at. "Be that as it may, Petiole would not
listen to Lief, and right now you are blaming him."
Ryson would not concede the point. He remained livid. "I'm blaming everyone.
Myself included. I have to do everything I can to stop them as well."
"What would you do?" Holli questioned sharply.
"Let me talk to Petiole. I'll stop him."
"He would not listen to you. He did not listen to Lief. You do not fully understand
what is happening in our camp." Holli did not pause, did not for a moment contemplate
whether or not to speak the true reasons for this calamity. Without hesitation and with the
clarity of a mission briefing, she pinpointed the crux of the dilemma. "Petiole is the eldest
elf, but he is a weak leader. He worries more about how the elves view him. He believes
the dwarf raid was a direct attack against his leadership. He is angry and offended. He
believes he has to act to bring back the respect of the camp."
Ryson was aghast. The idea of using the shadow trees to defend one's reputation was
beyond depravity. "Good Godson, you can't be serious? Is he mad?"
"It is not my place to say. "Holli replied evenly. "It is simply what he wishes. And
Petiole will see any attempt to stop his plans as an affront to his authority, a challenge.
He will not listen to you any more than he would listen to the youngest elf of our camp."
"Then you need a new leader!" Ryson demanded.
Holli did not answer. No matter how much she agreed with this, as an elf guard, she
was sworn to protect the camp elder's authority.
Ryson noted her reluctance. His eyes narrowed upon the elf guard. "You can't tell me
you support this? You have to agree this has to be stopped? Don't you?"
The elf guard fell silent. Worse for Ryson, she became stone-faced, rigid to anything
he might say.
The delver's disbelief over the situation doubled. "I don't care who the leader is, you
can't let this happen. If you do, you're saying you think every dwarf in Dunop is
responsible for what's happening here. Worse, you're saying everyone has to be punished.
Not only punished, but tortured. I saw those shadow trees. I know what they're like. If
you don't do something to stop this, you're sentencing all of Dunop to an end so painful
it's probably beyond your comprehension." He waited impatiently for some kind of
response from the elf.
Holli still would not answer. She did not return his blazing glare. Instead, she looked
over his shoulder, beyond him as if he was not there.
The silence brought discomfort.
Lief attempted to break it. He did his best to speak for her. "Easy to say, not easy to
do. Elf leadership is probably older than any form of human government. It is as old as
the ancients, it comes from elflore."
Ryson was not even slightly swayed. His emotions continued to bubble over like a
burning stew. "So what are you saying? Because of your traditions you're going to allow
what you call a weak leader to kill thousands beyond thousands with this horror that
should never have even been created? Isn't that what you said about the shadow trees
when you first told me about them? You were embarrassed that the elves could even
conceive of such a terror. I remember how you looked when you described how they
were first used. It was another dwarf-elf war. The fact that the elves used such a weapon
pained you. Now, you're going to allow it to happen again?"
Lief erupted. "What can I do?!
Ryson did not pause in his response. "Whatever it takes!"
Lief began to show anger himself. "And do you know what that might be?! Our
leader is now determined to strike back. He will not be swayed. He has the authority and
the right to make such a decision. Despite what you think, I have no right to question
him."
"No right?" Ryson's eyes shot open wide. "You have every right. And what justifies
the crime he's about to commit? Just because he's the camp elder? That means nothing.
No one who could even consider such an act should even be allowed to lead."
"Again, you speak with no knowledge! What do you think we can do? Just ask him to
step down? Take a vote like the humans? He is the leader because he is. There is only one
way to end his role, and that is with his death. Maybe you think I should just kill
Petiole?!"
Ryson did not back down for an instant. He was against killing, he held life sacred, but
perhaps that is what pushed him to this limit. He yelled right back. "If that's what it takes.
Better for one to die, than to allow him to do this."
Lief clenched his fists. Ryson's reaction was no true surprise to him, and the solution
was not something foreign to his own contemplations. Yet, as an elf, he knew more, more
of what was involved, more of what was truly possible. Yes, he had considered such a
thought, and he revealed as much as he spoke through a set jaw. "You think it's that easy!
You don't know anything! Ask Holli if she would let me get near Petiole if she knew I
was going to kill him."
Holli did not wait for the question. She answered without emotion. Her monotone
voice rang hollow. "I would have to stop him, kill him if necessary."
Ryson's eyes widened. His accusing glare turned from Lief to Holli. "You would kill
Lief?"
"It is my oath."
"Your oath? What in the name of Godson is wrong with you?"
"Ages of what you call tradition," Holli replied.
Ryson raged on. "That's not acceptable! What happened long ago means nothing
compared to what's going to happen right now. Can you look me in the eye and say that
you support even the thought of releasing the seeds on Dunop? Can you?"
"No, I can't."
"But you would protect Petiole?"
"They are not the same."
"Yes they are! Godson!" Ryson grasped for reason, searched for alternatives. "Fine.
You won't let Lief stop Petiole. What about me?"
Linda could not hold her own reaction. "You? You would go out to kill this elf?"
Ryson kept his eyes on Holli, but as he spoke to Linda, he checked his rage. "If it
would stop this, yes I would. You know I don't believe in killing anything, but I've seen
those trees. Anyone that would even think of using them has to be stopped."
Sy entered the debate cautiously, made a point of his own, a consideration of the
humans in Burbon. "I don't know much of these shadow trees, but I do know the dwarves
are a threat. They attacked us. They attacked the elves. You can't fault them for wanting
to defend themselves. The dwarves want to kill us, all of us."
Ryson shook his head. "Not all of them, and I can tell you about these trees. They
would kill every dwarf in Dunop." He turned his attention back to Lief and Holli. "What
about that? What about the dwarves that resist Yave? The ones that wanted us to warn
the algors, to help them remove Yave from power and stop the separatists? Do they
really want to attack us? Do they deserve a torturous death? And what about Jon? Does
he deserve to die because some irresponsible elf is worried about his own stupid
reputation?" His voice got rougher as he directed more and more of his reply at Holli. It
was soon evident he was questioning the elf guard. "What does that make the elves? Jon
stood with me, stood with us, to defeat Ingar, to save the land, including the elves that
were being poisoned by the magic. Is this how we repay him? We destroy his home with
the worse nightmare I've ever encountered. Is that what you're protecting?"
Holli remained steadfast in her reply. "I protect the elders of my camp as well as all
elves. The eldest is the leader. It is not my position to question his decisions. If you tried
to enter my camp with the intention of harming Petiole, I would do everything in my
power to stop you."
Ryson's disbelief widened. "This is ridiculous."
Lief listened to the delver with commiseration. This same debate, these same
questions raged in his own soul the moment Petiole announced he would use the shadow
tree seeds. He began to reel in his own anger at Ryson. He knew what fed the delver's
passion. In truth, it fed his own. He would rather see Petiole removed from power than
face the prospect of living with the guilt of unleashing the seeds upon the dwarves. He
would even accept the responsibility to kill Petiole, if that was a plausible solution. It
wasn't, as he understood the elf culture. He knew what Holli went through to become an
elf guard, knew what oath she swore. Ryson did not know these things.
The elf did his best to explain the facts of the situation. His voice was filled with
regret as he tried to reassure the delver of what was simply not possible. "I know how
you feel about the shadow trees. I feel the same way. I also agree that Petiole has no right
to unleash such a weapon just to reaffirm his authority. Be that as it may, I can not blame
Holli for what she has said. She is an elf guard. She takes an oath so strong it has never
been broken. It is a more than just a promise to the leaders or even to the camp. It is also
more than just tradition."
Lief rubbed his hands together as he searched for a way to explain the unexplainable.
"I believe I know you well enough to say that you would do anything to keep your own
word. Holli's oath is beyond just giving her word. It might be like you making an oath
tied to the blessing you have with the woman who stands beside you. If you break that
promise, you irrevocably destroy that very same blessing. That is the strength in her own
responsibility. She can not question it, no more than you can question the feelings you
have for this woman."
At first, Ryson wished to debate the issue. No promise was worth committing this
crime. No oath of service was so strong as to deny morality. What was this elf saying to
him? That killing off every dwarf and Dunop, the innocent along with the guilty, that
was simply acceptable because the elf guard swore to protect their own.
His mouth opened to protest just as Linda gently held him at his arm. He looked to
her. He saw his own life in her eyes, his happiness, his future. He would kill to protect
her.
His focus shifted to Holli. He saw pain. The elf guard held her oath as sacred as Ryson
held Linda. In this moment, that same oath was forcing her to do something which was
justified by no other reason. He saw the grief in her choice, the grief he would feel if he
committed murder to protect his own love.
Ryson swelled with regret. His harsh words to the elf guard forced their way back into
his memory like the returning tide. He immediately babbled out an apology. "I'm sorry. I
shouldn't blame you. I didn't understand. I thought you were defending Petiole's decision.
I think I see it's something more now. I am sorry."
Holli simply nodded. She herself had doubts. For the first time in her life she faced a
choice which actually brought her close to breaking her oath. Ryson said nothing which
was not true. Despite the attack of the dwarves, she could not justify the use of the
shadow trees. But elves had died in the face of the attack, more would die if tensions
escalated. Wouldn't the seeds save lives as well as take them? Then again, was that truly
why they were being used? Petiole was doing nothing more than fighting for his own
standing. He was wrong. She knew this. Yet, she must defend him, protect him. Her inner
turmoil kept her silent.
Lief spoke up, placed the blame on its ultimate recipient. "What is being said here is
nothing which hasn't already been considered. This debate can rage forever without a
proper conclusion. And no matter what we decide, it will not change Petiole's decision.
Still, he is not the true problem. Do not forget that it is Yave that is at the center of all our
difficulties. Look around you. Why are these humans training? They know they will be
attacked by the dwarves. Remember the algors? Who attacked them? Not Petiole. Again,
it was the dwarves under Yave's leadership. And as for Petiole himself, he would not be
in the position he is currently in had Yave not ordered an assault on the elves as well. I
say this not to justify the use of the shadow trees. I can never condone that.
Unfortunately, there are many elder elves that do. And remember the algors. Any day
now they will unleash their army of sand giants. It is Yave that is causing this. It is Yave
that is the problem. As much as you hate the thought, there is little we can do about this."
Ryson's jaw was tight with emotion. He could not accept everything Lief said, but the
underlying truth was undeniable. Whether it be shadow trees or sand giants, both were
only reactions to dwarf attacks. Yave and her followers drew first blood, and there were
no signs of her stopping. The first sin was hers, but that would not forgive the future sins,
including sins of abeyance. He would not be faultless if he did nothing to stop this
abomination. "That may well be, but I can't just do nothing. There has to be a way to stop
this."
"You would have to stop Yave," Lief replied firmly.
"Then that's what I'll have to try and do."
The shadow of doubt quickly darkened Lief's face. "And how will you accomplish this
feat."
Ryson clasped his hands together. He laid out the situation in simplicity. "Yave
attacked the algors because she thought they were responsible for Tun's death. I know
that's not true. I'll have to convince her of that."
"If you are considering what I think, it is foolishness. Yave will not listen to you," Lief
retorted. "You are a delver. Have you forgotten? She now sees you as an enemy as well.
Why do you think she attacked this place?"
"I have to try."
"Try what? Suicide? You are thinking of going to her, attempting to sway her opinion.
That much I can see. She'll have you killed."
The words fell like bricks upon Linda. She looked to Ryson with growing dread of his
intentions. "You can't do this."
"I have to do something. I wouldn't be able to live with myself."
"You can't be irrational either," Lief admonished.
"Listen to him, Ry," Linda implored, pleading while tears filled her eyes. "What good
would it do if you just get yourself killed?"
Holli found the strength to finally speak. "They are right, delver. You would
accomplish nothing but your own death. You are now the enemy of the dwarves in
Dunop. If you attempt to speak to the queen, she will have you killed as a spy. Do not
forget who you are dealing with. Yave has imprisoned her own son. If she is capable of
that, she is capable of anything. She has no reason to listen to you."
"But I was there. I can tell her." Ryson halted with this thought as another burst into
his head. "Wait a minute, wait a minute! Dzeb! Dzeb was there, too. He can tell her."
Lief and Holli did not immediately reject the idea. They appeared to consider it with
slight puzzlement.
Ryson continued. "You're right. Yave won't believe me, but how can she refuse a cliff
behemoth. She can't. They don't lie. They dedicate their lives to the word of Godson. This
can work. I can bring Dzeb into Dunop. He will speak the truth. Once she realizes Tun
was killed by the sphere and not by the algors, all of this will end. Even if she doesn't
accept it, the other dwarves of Dunop will. She will lose her power. They won't follow
her if she openly refutes a cliff behemoth."
Lief displayed hesitation. "I don't know, let me think about this."
"What's there to think about? No one in the land, not even Yave could deny a cliff
behemoth. She would have no choice. She would lose all her reasons to attack any of us."
Lief frowned. "What you say is possible, but you forget many things. You must first
find Dzeb, that will take time. Of that, you have little to none. Even now, plans are being
made to drop the seeds."
"You can delay them," the delver demanded. "Tell Petiole of my plan. Tell him I'm
not trying to stop him. I'm trying to stop Yave. If it works, Yave will have to admit her
fault. There won't be any more challenges to his leadership, and he won't have to drop the
seeds. Wouldn't that be the best solution to his problem? He has to give me a chance. All
I'm asking for is a few days."
"Even if I could convince him to wait, what about the algors? They will not wait. I
expect that even now they are carving the bodies of the sand giants. They will be released
soon. While you go searching for Dzeb, the sand giants may destroy Dunop."
"I don't think so," Holli interrupted. "In order for the algors to send enough sand giants
to destroy Dunop, it will take them at least several more days. I doubt they will send an
inadequate force. They will surely want to make the first attack overwhelming. They may
be able to carve that amount quickly, but they will still need time to collect the magical
energy needed to animate all of them."
Enin's interest leapt to untold heights. "Truly? A spell of animation?"
Holli spoke guardedly of the use of magic. "It is a powerful spell. It brings life to rock,
and as far as elflore goes, it has only been cast by the algors."
Even if it was a spell beyond the power of a human, the thought of such a conjuration
enticed the wizard. "And it will take them time to collect the magic? It must use a great
amount of energy."
Holli offered an explanation, but somewhat reluctantly. "Yes and no. The power is
great, but not as much as you might think. As a human wizard, you store magical energy
within you. The algors do not. They take the magical energy directly from the air. They
can collect it, but only hold it temporarily." She spoke the rest of the explanation to
Ryson. "This gives you the time you need. In order to animate an adequate number of
sand giants, the algors will need more time to collect the magic. I believe your idea has
merit."
Lief was not so willing. "It may give him a few days, but not unlimited time. He has to
first find Dzeb. That in itself could take a season."
"I don't think so," Ryson objected. "I think I know where Dzeb is. Based on what I
learned from him when he came to us, he lives in the Colad Mountains. For me, the trip
to the north range is less than a half day's journey. I can be there before nightfall today."
"But then you have to escort him back," Lief reminded the delver. "He will not move
as fast as you."
"Are you kidding? His legs are double the length of mine. Maybe they don't move as
fast, but his stride is twice as long as any of ours. We can be back here before midday
tomorrow and to the Dunop entrance before the following nightfall. That's all we need."
Lief began to succumb, but Linda voiced her own objections.
"But then what? You can't just walk into Dunop. They might kill you."
"I don't think so," Ryson reassured her. "Even if I was alone, they'd want to take me
prisoner first, try to find out what I know. If I'm with Dzeb, they might not even come
near me. Remember, we're talking about a cliff behemoth here. I know you've never seen
one. You just have to take my word for it. Just the sight of one is awe-inspiring."
Linda wanted to protest further, wanted to keep Ryson from endangering himself. She
wondered if saving the dwarves was worth the stakes he was willing to risk. He answered
the question for her.
"You have to let me do this. I won't be able to forgive myself if I don't try. I don't
think either one of us would want to live with that."
The image burned its imprint in her picture of the future. Ryson despondent, guiltladen, and worse. He would blame her. He would wish to be free of her. He would seek
the escape of exploring as only a delver would. His excursions would become longer and
farther from home. It would be hard enough to keep him anchored as it was. This would
destroy them. She gave him the only answer she could.
"Do what you have to."
Lief would still not let this be the final word. "There is yet one more consideration. If I
can prevail upon Petiole to delay the use of the shadow trees, there will be nothing to
slow the dwarf army. Most of us agree that Burbon is now Yave's most likely target.
Your plan puts this town and all its inhabitants in great danger. Are you willing to accept
this risk as well?"
This was not something Ryson expected. He did have a responsibility to the safety of
the people around him. He viewed his plan to stop the use of the shadow trees as his
moral obligation. Did he accept the price? Was it even his choice to make? The seeds
were a horror, but using them or not using them might decide whether the people of
Burbon would live or die. He dropped his forehead to his hands, crushed by the weight of
the decision.
"I don't know," he mumbled.
Sy did not let him face the decision alone. He spoke with the authority that was his as
the leader of Burbon. "That decision is not simply his own to make. If you're talking
about the safety of this town, you speak to me. Now we all seem to believe the dwarves
will attack Burbon next, but we don't know when. You say these shadow trees will stop
this attack, but so might Ryson's plan. If he stops their leader before she orders the next
attack, we will be as safe as if these trees you're talking about destroyed their entire city.
From what Ryson tells me, these trees will kill everyone, innocent civilians as well as the
dwarf army. I know I don't want that on my conscience. Maybe the best thing to do is
change our tactics. Maybe we can't defeat the dwarf army, but I can consider different
strategies to hold them at bay if they do attack. After all, what we're fighting for now is
time. I would even consider temporarily evacuating the town, anything that would buy
Ryson the time he needed."
Holli's respect for Sy elevated to that of an equal elf guard. She heard sincerity in his
words and iron in his will. He was willing to consider all options to make Ryson's plan
work. He did so not simply to protect his own people, the humans, but to save the lives of
dwarves, a race he had only encountered in battle. Her tone carried that respect as she
offered him the only true alternative.
"I do not think evacuation will help you. If the dwarves do attack before Ryson brings
Dzeb to Dunop, they will catch you in the process of leaving the city. You will not be
able to defend yourself, especially if you are walking on open roads. I do, however, see
another option you may consider. Will you hear it?"
"Of course."
"I can order a contingent of elf guards to help defend your town. I can tell you how to
fight to avoid great casualties. You will not be able to defeat the dwarves completely, but
you will have a chance to hold them off and protect most of your town for at least a day
or two. The dwarves will not expect the defenses you will throw at them. It should
frustrate them. I can not guarantee anything but a greater chance at survival."
Lief spoke out once more, one last decree at the choice involved. "Let none of us
make a mistake about this. That is what we all face. Survival. Though none of us may
wish to consider it, the shadow trees would stop the dwarves and enhance all of our
chances to live. But we all also seem to be against such a thing. Still, I want it to be clear.
While we wish to save Dunop, we risk our own lives, some of us to the hands of the very
same dwarves that have brought this conflict upon us. Is this what we all say? If so, I
shall do my part, I will convince Petiole to hold off on using the seeds. He can refuse my
ideas, but he can't refuse listening to them. As Ryson has said, I have gained enough
status within my camp to force a meeting of all the elders. I will talk for two days if that
is what is necessary. That will give him the time to bring Dzeb to my camp. Once that is
accomplished, Petiole will have no choice but to let Ryson carry out the remainder of his
mission. If, however, Ryson can not find Dzeb as easily as he believes, this may all be for
naught. I can not stall the elders indefinitely. Petiole will give his order and the seeds will
be dropped. We will have taken a great risk for nothing. I say this not because I doubt
Ryson, I only wish to make our situation clear."
Lief paused, took a deep breath, before finishing with conviction. "I say we take the
risk and give the delver his chance, but my risk is not as great as the others. What about
the rest of you? Are we all in agreement?"
They were.

Holli's attention was divided. She stood on the platform of Burbon's western tower just
as Lief advanced upon the Fuge River and Ryson sped off to the northern mountains.
Enin and Sy waited at her side, but they said nothing to distract her. Instead, she watched
her previous companions, her friends, begin their individual quests in grim silence. Her
eyes followed their trails, but she also took several sweeping glances at the town behind
her. Ryson and Lief's safety were of paramount importance, but this human town was
now charged to her care. Three points of focus. She fought to keep her attention upon
them all.
At this particular moment, though, Lief's progress called to her with the greatest sense
of urgency. If Lief faced danger in his trip back to their camp, it was at this moment. She
knew he could not sense river rogues. Once he reached the trees of Dark Spruce, he
would be safe, but now, at the river's edge and moving through tall grass, he was
vulnerable. Damn stubborn elf. He refused an escort, even just to the trees. He told her it
wasn't necessary, that she should focus upon the preparations to defend the human town.
He even rejected an escort of Sy's guards that were already prepared to scout the area on
horseback. How foolish was that? Pride. Ignorant, stubborn pride.
As for Ryson, he was simply a blur of motion. The spectacle itself called for attention.
No dust kicked up in his wake. Only the blurred outline of his body was visible, and it
rushed along the ground as a bird soars across the open sky. As fast as he moved, as far
as he traveled, he would remain in her sight for some time. Her eyes were strong, and the
delver moved over the flatlands to the north. She commanded a strategic view from this
platform and she could see well toward the horizon. The Colad Mountains stood proudly,
clear in her sight. They waited like a great barrier, an impenetrable wall. They extended
for untold distances. Surely, the cliff behemoths waited there, but how long would it take
Ryson to find the one he needed, to find Dzeb?
As for the town, it waited for her in unmoving silence. At her request, the human
volunteers had stopped their current training. That would become necessary soon enough,
but they would also need to rethink their methods of fighting. It was of no use to train
them as simple ground soldiers. To do so would invite disaster. If they were to fight off
dwarves, they would have to focus upon evasion.
The townspeople of Burbon surprisingly did not question her. Rumors were spreading
of course, rumors that an elf was going to teach them how to fight. Most did not protest,
and they showed no sign of resentment. They did not know how to fight dwarves. Those
civilians that thought they did were quickly rebuffed by soldiers that watched comrades
die in the first dwarf attack. As these stories were recounted, any mumbling of
dissatisfaction quickly died away. The people simply waited, waited for her direction,
waited and hoped that this elf might hold their salvation.
Holli sensed all of this. First, however, it was necessary to review the full breadth of
the town. The tower she now stood upon held that opportunity. She could inspect the
structures and the lay of the land from this vantage point. It also allowed her to watch the
departure of Lief and Ryson. As for the delver, he was relatively safe. She doubted there
was anything that posed a threat to him in the open lands he now traveled. She doubted
anything could catch him. Though his speed of movement held her fascination, it was
Lief that held her concern.
Her own muscles drew tight as she watched with narrowed eyes. She tried to drink in
the magic that filled the air as Lief moved upon the bridge. She knew she couldn't sense
that far, but she made the attempt. She also requested the same of the human wizard that
stood beside her.
"Enin. Do you sense anything? Any disturbances in the magic that surrounds you?"
Enin immediately understood her purpose. It was as if he could see her thoughts, her
concern painted itself in the magical energies which flowed around her. "I can not discern
anything out of place, either in the town or in the clearing. I sense you standing beside
me, but I can not sense anything else, not even your comrade so far in the distance. I'm
afraid that is beyond my range. You are worried about a river rogue?"
"He won't be safe until he reaches the trees," Holli admitted.
Sy grunted. "Then why didn't he accept an escort? He's as important to us now as
anyone else."
Holli did not answer. Lief was on the bridge. He seemed to move in slow motion.
"Why doesn't he move faster?"
Holli's hands gripped the railing of the tower. Her eyes scanned the river. She saw
nothing. Unable to do anything else, she pulled the bow from her shoulder. She took a
long, thin arrow from her quiver and placed it upon the string.
Sy wished to question her, to ask her if she saw anything, but he remained silent. He
would not distract her, not even for a moment. Instead, he also took a precaution. He
signaled to the scouts on horseback to prepare to advance. He held his hand for them to
wait as he now watched Lief with equal diligence.
Lief was upon the bridge, moving to its far end. He stopped. A moment of caution as
he surveyed the banks of the river below him. Nothing, no river rogue, no danger. He
moved forward. With no obstacle before him, he moved undeterred to the trees. He took
to their limbs.
Holli stood down from her state of readiness. She slowly released the tension on her
bow string and returned the arrow to her quiver. She spoke with obvious relief. "Lief will
give word to the elf guard. A contingent of archers to assist us should be here before
nightfall."
Sy signaled all clear to the scouts and motioned for them to begin their standard
patrol.
Holli took one last glimpse as the fading outline of Ryson to the north before she fixed
her attention on the streets of Burbon.
Sy, however, would not immediately disregard Holli's previous intentions. "Could you
have hit a target from this distance? It's a long way to that bridge. It would also be a
dangerous shot. Your friend would have been in harm's way."
"I don't know," Holli replied stoically. "But it was all I could do."
Sy weighed the reply. If he was going to place his faith in this elf guard, he wanted to
know more about her, including her consideration of risk. "That doesn't really answer the
question. An arrow would have to travel a long way from here. The target could have
moved. Lief could have moved, right into the path of your arrow. If a river rogue
attacked, would you have taken the shot?"
"Yes," Holli said shortly.
Sy waited.
Holli noted the expectation of his silence. She offered her explanation. "If Lief was
attacked by a river rogue, he would have had no chance of survival on his own. That is a
plain and simple fact. His only chance would have been my arrow. If he was attacked and
I hit the rogue, he would have had a chance to escape. If my arrow missed, it might have
distracted the creature. Again, Lief would have had a chance to escape. If my arrow hit
Lief, it would be no worse than a rogue's teeth or claws."
Sy pressed for more information. "Would you have given your friend there a chance to
escape on his own? I mean, how long would you have waited before you took the shot?"
Holli answered quickly. Her mind was on the new task at hand, protecting the town,
but she answered with all honesty. "Not long. If Lief was caught on the bridge, his fate
would have been certain. If he made it to open ground, he might have been able to draw
his sword and outmaneuver a rogue."
Sy rubbed his chin. "You wouldn't have waited for him to call for your help? You
would have made the decision as to when to risk his life based on your own
interpretations?"
"The bow was in my hands. It was no one else's decision to make."
"Is that how you will see to the defense of this town?"
Holli raised an eyebrow. "Do you object?"
Sy pointed to the cold facts. "At this point, my objections are pretty much irrelevant.
I've accepted your expertise in this matter. You will guide us. That has already been
decided. That doesn't mean I want to remain ignorant of your views. Your opinion of
acceptable risk will certainly define your tactics. I would be negligent if I didn't attempt
to recognize just how far you would go, what you might consider appropriate in the face
of danger."
"I see. It's an acceptable question. You are putting your life in my hands."
"I'm putting the life of everyone in this town in your hands," Sy reminded her firmly.
Holli looked over the streets, scanned the buildings, and settled her attention on those
that watched and waited for her advice. "Yes, you are. Will it ease your worries if I tell
you that I don't think there are any acceptable casualty counts? That I think the loss of
one is one too many?"
Sy did not reply.
Holli did not wait for him. "I don't expect you to believe me, and I guess you will
remain ill at ease as long as you depend on another's judgment. But you also know what
we face. If the dwarves attack us, there will be injuries among your people, there will be
death. I can not prevent that. But I still believe that one casualty is one too many. I will
do everything within my power not to just limit the number of casualties, but to eliminate
them. If the battle ever arises, and I truly pray it does not, my plans will to be to save all,
everyone. Even when that no longer becomes possible, even when I see the dead on the
field, I will act so that those that are still alive fighting will remain alive."
Holli nodded over to the bridge. Lief was now out of sight, his trail covered by the
limbs of the trees.
"You asked me if I would take the shot from this tower, would I risk Lief's life to save
it. Yes, I would, but you have to understand why. I would not risk Lief's life for my own
glory, but I would if I felt it was his only chance. That is how I will deal with your people
as well. Does that ease your mind?"
Sy smiled. He liked Holli, appreciated her honesty. "My mind is never at ease, but it
does answer my question. I believe I have put my faith in the right person. Excuse me,
the right elf!"
"Let me now ask you a question." Holli nodded to the throng of onlookers below.
"How much can I count on the humans you are trying to train? Do not rate them as
soldiers, that is not what I need to know. Rate them for what we face. I need to know if
they will be determined to carry out the orders given to them. Do not be concerned with
whether you think they are able to defend themselves or able to perform with
competence, just their willingness to do so. Will they hold their position to save the town,
or will they run to save their own lives?"
Sy considered the question. He thought of all the different people, all the different
characteristics of those that now seemed willing to help defend. It felt difficult to judge
them with one sweeping statement, but he kept his answer short and pointed. "Some will
run. Most will do what they can to do what's expected of them."
"Do you think you can weed out those which might run?"
"No."
Holli frowned, but only for a moment. "That is unfortunate. When one runs, others
that might have held often join in flight."
"I'm sorry, but there's just no way I can tell for sure. I can make some guesses, but
that's all."
"I will ask you to do that. Those that you feel our prone to run in the face of battle
must be given other tasks."
Holli turned from Sy. She inspected the town again, this time she took long,
discriminating studies of many of the buildings. Her eyes followed the length of the wall.
Only for a brief moment did she inspect the clearing between the hills and the barrier.
She revealed little as she quickly focused back on the heart of the town. She looked at the
crossing patterns of the roads and alleys, the differing heights of the many structures. It
would not be like fighting the dwarves in the forest, but it held many advantages. She
quickly played out several scenarios in her mind.
Sy and Enin left her to her study. They watched her carefully, but said nothing.
Holli repaid their consideration by speaking her thoughts aloud. "If we do this right, if
we're lucky, this may just be the perfect place to hold out against the dwarves. A good
deal will depend on how many they send at us. I'm sure it will be a large compliment of
warriors, but we can make that work to our advantage. Dwarves are stubbornly proud and
easily taunted into breaking ranks. It will help us if they send several hundred soldiers as
opposed to small strike teams. The commanders will have trouble keeping their warriors
in formation. It is in confusion which we can overcome their strength."
The warrior elf turned to the ladder which led down from the platform. "I've seen all I
need to from this point. I need to see things from ground level now."
Sy and Enin shrugged at each other. They simply followed her.
Holli stepped lively through the streets. At times she would stop in the middle of
intersections. She gauged the distance between opposing rooftops, judged the height of
several buildings. Many times she crouched as she walked, assuming the height of a
dwarf. She took a perspective of seeking cover. She sought out narrow alleys and covered
porches. In each tight place, she knelt and looked to the heights surrounding her. She
nodded or frowned, but she said nothing.
As she passed many of the humans that watched her, she did not ignore them. She
watched how they moved, how they stood. She looked for signs of impatience. She
looked into their eyes, watched for focus and concentration. She seemed neither pleased
nor disappointed with what she saw.
Finally, she made a request of Sy.
"I would like to see your supply of arms."
Sy guided her to the main armory, another brick building located next to the command
post. He waved to the guards as he led her inside. Well organized rows of crates lined
most of the available space. Some were open and revealed their contents, mostly swords
and spears.
Holli ignored these. She turned her attention to the slings, crossbows, and long bows.
She picked up a crossbow first, then a sling.
"Excellent," she murmured.
Both Enin and Sy watched her carefully. Sy was curious about her attention to certain
weapons. The spears were effective against the dwarves in their first battle, but she was
as indifferent to these as she was to the short swords.
Enin focused on her ability to deal with this enclosed place. He remembered how
uncomfortable Lief appeared within the walls of Sy's office. She appeared calmer with
her surroundings than her male counterpart. If these brick walls invoked a sense
discomfort, she hid it well.
Holli noticed their attention, but she disregarded it. Her concentration remained
squarely upon the stock of weapons. "These boxes? They contain more of these bows?
And these? More slings?"
"Yes," Sy answered simply.
"You are well supplied."
Sy revealed more truth. "It's not like we really had a choice. After the first goblin
attack, we made sure we were capable of defending ourselves. This isn't even all we have,
either. I wouldn't keep all my eggs in one basket. I have more stored at command HQ.
Those are ready for immediate use, no unpacking is necessary. I also have stores hidden
in certain buildings throughout the town."
"You have more?" Holli questioned with a note of appreciation.
"Buying this stuff cost the town plenty, but it was a cost we were all willing to pay."
"It was wise. It may save your life."
"You seem most interested with the bows. I have to tell you, the spears worked well
for us last time."
Holli did not reply immediately. She weighed what she wanted to say and how she
would say it. She respected this man, and she would not callously disregard his opinions
or his input. His actions, as told to her, in the previous battle with the dwarves saved
many lives. She would not offend him. Still, this was his only encounter with the
dwarves, and it was only a small attack force. He had no experience fighting a fullfledged dwarf army. No human did. There was no knowledge for him to draw on. It was
her responsibility to give him that knowledge, for her to draw on elflore and her own
training to impress upon him what they face, but she would would do so with absolute
respect for him as a soldier and as a leader.
"Do not take lightly what I will tell you, for I will never take lightly what you have to
say to me. You have already accomplished much more than any other living human
commander can claim. You have faced a dwarf attack and forced their retreat. There is no
question in my mind as to your ability to lead, but there is a need for you to instill what I
can teach beyond your own experience.
"You must forget what you think you know about war. I can say this because over the
many cycles of the seasons, I have watched how humans have fought against each other.
I have learned a good deal about how your commanders think in battle, and I have seen
what guides their decisions. While these maneuvers would work well against almost any
other race in our land, they will not work against the dwarves.
"There are no battle lines, no points of defense. There is no safe haven, there is no
place which is more secure than another, and there is never a clear border between you
and the enemy. The entire area is the battlefield. No matter what is going on in another
section of this town, there is always the threat that a hundred or even a thousand dwarves
may surface right in front of you in an instant. You can never be sure where their army is,
or how large they are. Just when you think you have found the main body of their army, a
larger force will break through the ground behind you. I say this because you show some
confidence in the use of spears. I tell you in all honesty, if our lives become dependent on
spears, we are lost."
Sy grasped for the knowledge she offered, grasped for hope. "Can we depend on
those? Can we depend on bows and slings?"
"We have to depend on how well we can use them," Holli replied. "Remember our
goal will not to be to defeat the dwarves, but for us to survive. It is not the same thing."
"I know. It's the difference between attack and defense."
"Very true, and we will defend this town with but one goal in mind, to allow everyone
the greatest chance to live to see tomorrow."
She did not press the issue at this point. Instead, she began inspecting more of the
crates. "My advice at this point is for you to begin handing out these bows and slings.
Have your people train with these."
She turned from the crates and moved back outside. Again, she looked to the rooftops.
As Sy followed her out the door, she made her final requests for preparation. "You will
need ropes and ladders. Have them in place as soon as possible. Hang the ropes from the
rooftops to the ground. Place the ladders against the sturdiest of your structures. As an elf
I know this, the way to escape a dwarf is to climb out of his reach. We would climb the
trees of our forest, you will have to climb these structures you have built. It does not
guarantee survival. A band of angry dwarves could collapse these houses, just as they can
fall a tree in a single swing, but it is a needed escape route. You will also need bells in the
towers, an alarm."
"We use signal fires," Sy advised.
"That is even better, but we will also need a general alarm that can be heard. Dwarves
normally attack right after sunset when most of your citizens will be in their homes."
Enin spoke up, unable to curb his own desire to offer his unique service. "What is
there that I can do to help offer warning? Is there any thing you can think of that I can
try? I know the dwarves are resistant to magic, but there must be something I can do.
Elves know a good deal of magic, don't they? Is there a spell which might locate the
tunnels as they are being dug?"
Holli cast a doubtful glance at the wizard. "I doubt at this time elves know any more
than you in the way of casting spells."
Enin could not contain his surprise. "Really? I thought elves were very prone to using
magic."
"As a race in whole, elves are more inclined to magic than humans, but that is not the
case when it comes to comparing individuals. Throughout the legends, throughout elflore,
the most powerful of the wizards and sorcerers have been of human descent. Do not
underestimate your power."
"You think I have great power?"
Holli did not want to answer that question. She narrowed her words to his original
question. "I am uncertain of the extent of your power. I also do not know any spells
which may help us. Magic is a powerful tool, but at this time, too much knowledge has
been lost for it to serve us with any reliability."
Enin felt the need to defend his new found craft. "I don't know about that. I've already
been able to come up with a small web spell. I know that won't help with dwarves that
can tunnel underneath it, but there may be an offshoot of that spell. It may be just a case
of finding a variant, something that would sense the movement underground." Enin's eyes
lit brighter as he carried the proposal even farther. "Maybe I can do even better. Maybe
there's a way I can stop them from digging under us all together. I can try to find a way to
collapse the tunnels, like and earth quake, small in scale of course."
Holli replied coarsely. "I would strongly advise against experimenting with such
spells. If you don't know what you're doing, you could cause great damage."
"I would be careful," Enin protested.
"I'm sure you would, but it is still too risky to attempt. Dwarves are very resistant to
magic. Anything you try may have dangerous consequences to us, and may do nothing to
stop the dwarves. I will also suggest that during battle you refrain from attacking the
dwarves directly with any spells you have not previously cast with certainty."
Enin looked at Holli with bewilderment. "What would you have me do? Should I just
sit on my hands?"
"I would simply ask that you remain careful. Experimenting with spells may be more
dangerous than the dwarves themselves."
Enin would not hold back his growing insecurity. "You know, the other elf didn't trust
me, either. I sensed that. Now I sense the same thing in you. I want to know why."
Holli became somewhat rigid. "I can not speak for Lief. I can only speak for myself. It
is not you I don't trust, it is the magic."
"Nonsense!"
Holli's expression remained blank. She would hide her emotions as a trained elf guard.
No one would be able to read the slightest sentiment from her face.
Enin, however, looked beyond her expression. He looked deep into her being; he saw
her thoughts, felt her emotions. He became angry. "You don't trust me! You’re hiding the
reasons. You deem them an important secret. Why!"
Holli looked to Sy. "I thought I was here to assist you. Am I now on trial here?"
Sy rubbed his hands uncomfortably. "Of course not. Your assistance here is greatly
appreciated. I think ..."
Enin did not take his eyes off of Holli, even as he cut Sy off. "Don't involve him. This
is between you and me. You are telling me not to help protect my own home. You are
making this decision based on mistrust. I want to know why!"
Holli gave him the truth. "I fear what you can do, whether willingly or unwillingly.
There is nothing about you which gives me this fear other than the potential of your
power. I sense nothing but good within your intentions, but I feel the range of what you
are capable of. That in itself is enough to create my doubts about you. The magic is again
new to the land. There is no knowledge to guide you, no elder sorcerer to train you. If
you had an inkling of just how powerful you could be, you would understand my doubts.
You might even share my fears."
"Why should I be afraid?" Enin demanded.
Holli responded with a question of her own. "How much do you truly understand of
this magic you use? Do you understand the significance of the circles which enclose your
wrists at the time of your casting? Do you understand what it means to cast white
magic?"
"Yes," Enin replied stoically.
"Do you really?"
Sy listened to the conversation with mystification. He did not understand the
significance and expressed as much. "What are you talking about? What's the deal with
the white magic and the circles?"
Holli answered the question but kept her attention upon Enin, gauging his reaction to
her response. "The color of the magic at spell casting signifies the wizard's true power.
The color represents a control over one of the dominions. All wizards can learn to cast
spells over each dominion, but their power is normally enhanced over the dominion of
their true spirit. A wizard that casts green magic has great power over nature, yellow
magic is power over light. Each color represents a discipline of the forces of this land.
Others include fire, water, land, air, and storms. There are, however, two very rare and
unique representations of color. White and black. Black is the power over forces beyond
this land, power over shadows. White is power over all the forces of the land, not just
one. A wizard casting white magic could cast spells with equal power over fire or over
water, or any other force of the land. The wizard has no weakness in any of the
dominions." Holli spoke coldly now, spoke to the wizard. "Lief saw you cast a spell. He
saw the white light. In all of elflore there is no true record of such a wizard, there has
only been rumor."
Enin did not blink, even as Holli compounded the references to his strength. The elf
pointed to her wrists. "The shapes at spell casting are also a sign of strength. The closer
the shape comes to a perfect circle, the stronger the spell. Angles or points invite breaks
in the power. Circles represent strength throughout. In the time of legends, spell casters
practiced for many cycles of the season, lifetimes, before they could perfect a single
circle. You have two and the magic has been here in the land for less than a full cycle of
the seasons."
Sy looked at Enin with greater appreciation. He stammered at the possibilities. "Is all
that bad? After all, he's on our side."
Holli did not bend even slightly from her position. "He has the power, but no one has
the knowledge he needs to control that power." Again, she directed her last sentiments
directly to the wizard. "We face a very grave situation here. If the dwarves attack in
force, we will need every advantage just to survive. Your power might give us that
advantage, then again, it might disrupt our own forces. You might unwillingly become
the spark that leads to the complete destruction of this place. That is the risk of your
power, that is what creates my doubts. Without the magic, I honestly believe this town
has a chance. It will be difficult, but the hope is there. That is the hope we all have to
hold. If instead, we put our faith in the chance you may find a way to use your power
properly, we will be grasping at chance. Do you understand this?"
Enin turned away from her, not out of anger but out of need. She doubted him, for
whatever reason, she mistrusted him. He could not accept these same doubts. They would
ruin him if he acknowledged them. Better for him to ignore her. Otherwise, he would
stagnate. He could not have that. In his mind, she was right about only two things, and
that's what he would focus upon. There was great power within him, and he had nothing
but good intentions. If she did not want his help now, he would not offer it, but he would
not be cast aside either. He would remain in Burbon, wait for the attack he somehow
knew was coming. He would hope they would prevail without him, but if not, he would
be there. He walked away from the elf and his commander without another word.
Sy watched him leave. The guard captain wondered about what just happened. "I don't
think that was necessary. He's helped this town survive over the last season."
"I had no choice," Holli admitted. "He read my emotions. He knew of my mistrust. I
could not hide it from him, even though I wanted to. He is very powerful."
"Powerful enough to possibly save us."
"Or destroy us," Holli noted. "Didn't you hear what I said?"
"Yes, I did, but I know him. He's here to help us. That's all."
Holli replied bluntly. "And that's all I am here for. I'm not requiring you to accept all
of my decisions. As you once said, the safety of this town is ultimately your
responsibility. If you think I have made a misjudgment, by all means call the wizard
back. I will continue to advise you in whatever decision you make. If you want the
wizard to attempt spells, I will do what I can to work it into my plans. Remember, I'm not
here to take control. I am here to help. It is simply my judgment that, when dealing with
dwarves, a novice wizard is more of a danger than an advantage, especially a wizard that
is capable of what he is capable of. Do you disagree?"
"How can I disagree? I don't know a damn thing about dwarves."
"Then what is it you want of me?"
Sy simmered in his own frustrations. "I just want your help."
"Then let me give it to you. Forget what has happened for now. I believe the wizard
understands what I have said to him. He is not leaving this town. He is only leaving me to
my duties. We have much work to do. We have to train your people, we have to construct
obstacles for the dwarves. Let us begin that now and let us worry about the wizard
another time."

"Why are you unwilling to give him this chance?"
"Because the longer we wait, the more we invite another attack from the dwarves."
Petiole's reasoning rang hollow. Lief attacked it.
"If anyone's inviting an attack, it's the humans, the same humans he has vowed to
protect. If he is willing to take that risk, if the humans are willing to accept it, I can not
see why you can't. Are you saying the humans can now teach us a lesson in bravery?"
Petiole lashed out defensively. "No elf has anything to learn from the humans,
especially me."
"Yet, you won't wait."
"I will not wait because we are more at risk than the humans. We will be attacked
next, not them."
Lief's eyes widened in disbelief. "Even you can't believe that. You know what has
happened. The humans at Burbon forced the dwarves to retreat with heavy casualties.
You think Yave will bother with us after this. Every elf in this camp is sighing with relief
upon hearing this news. They know the humans are now the true target of the dwarves."
Petiole remained obstinate. "That does not make us any less of a target. From what
you say, the humans will be easily overrun. The dwarves will then turn their attention
back to us."
Lief scratched his head. He searched for the words to make Petiole understand. He did
not want to be confrontational, Petiole usually became stubbornly defensive at such
provocation. He had to swallow his emotions, speak with diplomacy, something very
difficult for him. He calmed the tone of his voice.
"Holli believes the humans can hold for a few days. With the archers we have sent
them, so do I. That is all I'm asking from you, a few days. Hold off on using the seeds.
Just wait a little while. We will know soon enough as to whether this will work. The
delver's option is the best for everyone involved."
"That's not my opinion."
So much for diplomacy.
"Oh? And you think using the shadow trees is the answer? You would rather just wipe
out the city of Dunop and everyone in it, including the dwarves that remain loyal to our
past treaties and want nothing but peace with us. Is that how you wish to be
remembered?"
Lief struck a nerve with the camp elder. Petiole's insecurity over his own image as
well as his legacy influenced each of his decisions. He wallowed in hesitation. "You can
not place the blame of this situation on me! It's not that I want to use the seeds. I have no
choice. It was the dwarves who attacked first."
Lief noted the indecisiveness. He pressed harder. "It is still your decision on how we
react." He paused for a moment, let a silence build. When he spoke again, he did so with
weighty tones. "Do you understand how important this moment is? Your place in the
history of this camp, in elflore for that matter, will depend on what you do at this
moment. This is the first time we have faced open dwarf hostilities since the last time the
shadow trees were used. Do you recall elflore of that occasion? How are the creators of
the shadow trees looked upon? With respect? Or with shame? You now face the same
situation. Whether you like it or not, you will become part of elflore with what you do
now. How will you be remembered, Petiole?"
The camp elder held to his fears and insecurities. "How will I be remembered if I let
the dwarves attack again? How much respect will I lose if I appear to be weak?"
"How much respect will you gain if you show some patience? That is not weakness.
That is strength."
Petiole was not so sure. He often delayed his decisions, not out of patience but out of
confusion. It seemed the longer he waited, the harder it was to decide. The elves in his
camp would always look to him expectantly. He would hear the whispers - Petiole can't
make up his mind. He did not want to hear that again. And what if the dwarves did attack
again? They would blame him, say he shouldn't have waited.
Then again, what would they say if he ordered the release of the seeds? Right now
they might praise him because they are afraid, but what would happen as time passed?
The fear would subside. Stories of the dwarves' fate would reach the surface. It would be
a horrible tale. He might be remembered as a criminal. He continued to flounder in selfdoubts.
"You do not understand." Petiole spoke almost pleading for compassion. "I do not
want to drop the seeds, but I don't want to be responsible for the death of more elves. The
seeds seem like a horror... I mean, they are a horror, but they have kept peace among the
dwarves and elves for so many cycles of the seasons. It may be they are needed again,
just to bring that peace back. What am I suppose to do? Sacrifice this camp so I'm not
remembered as the elf that destroyed Dunop? How will I be remembered then?"
Lief shook his head. "You're missing the point of my request. It is not simply making
a choice between using the seeds or not using the seeds. I am asking for you to wait. Let
the delver Acumen find the cliff behemoth. Let them both go to Yave. How can Yave
deny the word of a cliff behemoth? She can't. The war will end before it begins. And you
will be remembered for your patience."
"Or for my indecision!" Petiole suddenly lashed out. His emotions swung like a
pendulum. His indecision turned to fury and petty jealousies. An angry fire burned in his
words. "It's so easy for you to stand there and speak of how I'll be remembered. Your
place in the legends is already forged. The great Lief Woodson, the elf that stood with
Ryson Acumen at Sanctum Mountain, the elf that helped destroy the sphere of Ingar and
save the land. You have nothing to lose in this. No one will blame you for anything. But
what about me? I have already announced my intentions to this camp. They know of my
decision. What will they say once they hear I've changed my mind? You speak so
arrogantly about our place in elflore. That's because that's all you have. You don't face the
weight of leadership. You have the respect of every member of this camp, but you have
no responsibility. You think I'm going to stand here and let you place even more burdens
on me. It will not happen. I have made my decision and that is that."
Lief seethed. His own words flowed from him like slow bubbling lava. "I don't think
so. You don't know what you're doing, and I won't have it. Would you like to see how
much responsibility I'm willing to take? Would you like to see how I'm willing to take
the weight of leadership?"
The younger elf stepped forward, like a stalking cat. Desperation, frustration clouded
his thinking. He was tired of Petiole, tired of his inability to lead. He forgot where he
was.
Petiole immediately took a step backwards. He shook ever so slightly.
Suddenly, two elf guards dropped from the trees. They took a position between Lief
and Petiole. An arrow split the air and plunged into the ground at Lief's feet.
Lief made no attempt to move other than to turn his head in the direction of the
arrow's origin. He glared into the thick branches of a blue spruce. To his sharp eyes, the
outline of another guard was visible. The bow was again ready to fire. Lief shook his
head and cursed. He did not look at Petiole, but he directed serious words at him. His
eyes remained on the guards, inspecting their blank expressions. They would kill him if
he made another move toward Petiole, but they could not stop his declaration.
"I suggest you give me the time I want. If you do not, I will call for a meeting of the
full elder council. I will outline every flaw in every decision you have ever made. I will
do so to prove that you are not worthy to make this decision. I realize they will do
nothing to remove you from power, but because I am Lief Woodson they will have to
hear me out. What do you think will happen when an elf of my standing begins to openly
debate your every decision? If you think the elves of this camp doubted your word
before, just wait."
Petiole's fear grew. "You wouldn't do ..."
Lief cut him off. "I will get the time I want. You will not be able to drop the seeds as
long as I call for a meeting of the elders. You will have to wait. If I have to speak
continuously until the delver has returned, I will. I will have my way at your expense.
Can you imagine what I will be saying?"
Petiole's shoulders slouched. He didn't know how to respond. "You can't do this to me.
Do you know what this will cause? Our camp will be in disarray."
Lief exploded. "It's already in disarray. It has been so since Mappel died."
Petiole recoiled as if Lief had pierced him with a spear.
Lief caught a glimpse of Petiole's reaction. He knew he had hurt the elder elf. Not out
of sympathy, but out of reason, he gave Petiole one last hope to grasp. "I will make but
one concession. I will announce to the camp it was my wish to delay the use of the seeds.
I will take full responsibility. That way, if we are attacked again by the dwarves, you can
blame me. I don't care what you think about me. I don't care what this camp thinks of me.
I don't even care if I lose my place in the legends. I care about giving Ryson Acumen the
chance he desires, the chance he deserves. I owe him that. We all owe him that. I'm
giving you this chance to save the little respect you have left. I suggest you take it. Take
it, Petiole, resign yourself to the fact that I'm not giving you any other choice. Unless, of
course, you order these guards to take my life. That is the only way you can stop me. Will
you go that far? And if you do, will they follow that order? They might have been ready
to protect you when I was ready to attack, but what about now? I make no more advance
upon you. Will they kill me just to protect your ego?"
Lief watched the expression of the guards change. The blankness dissolved. Agitation
grew. They wished Lief would stop. Surely they did not want to make that decision. It
was their sworn duty to protect the life of the camp elder, but would they follow an order
to kill a fellow elf, a legend.
Lief persisted. "Well? What is your decision Petiole? Do you want to test the loyalty
of these guards? Who will they be loyal to?"
Petiole mumbled as he directed his gaze to the ground.
Lief did not hear him. "What?"
"You have five days," Petiole repeated slightly louder.

When the contingent of elf archers reached Burbon, many new defenses had already
been constructed. Battlements with jagged, low-lying edges lined many a street.
Barricades of barbed wire crossed most intersections. Nets of thick rope blocked
alleyways. The design of each obstacle was clear, to herd emerging dwarves away from
cover and into the open.
The human soldiers handled the construction of these obstacles, at least the ones that
volunteered for ground duty. They would be the first to engage the dwarves during any
attack, and they would need to know the lay of these obstacles. Building them helped
them understand their purpose. Sy stayed with these men, his finest soldiers. He would
lead them in the coming battle. As he helped with the battlements, he spoke openly of the
strategies for the ground forces. Those on the ground would risk their own lives to serve
as diversions.
As for the civilians, they learned the use of ranged weapons from masters at the bow.
The sharp eyes and steady hands of the elves made them natural archers. Holli knew she
could not teach these aspects to the humans, but she could make them far more deadly
than if they were left to practice on their own. She brought the human students up to
rooftops and to the heights of the wall. They learned to use the downward perspective of
their higher position with their very first shot. Holli taught them to pick their targets, to
reload and shoot with timed patience. She taught them the limits of their range and how
to use cover to hide their own position. As the other elves arrived, they assisted in this
training.
The sun set and darkness slowly crept through the streets. The air became cold
quickly. The volunteers were allowed a break for a meal, but all were asked to return in
order to learn to shoot during the darkness of nightfall. Every civilian complied with this
request, without hesitation, without grumbling.
Holli counseled them further on how to pick targets based on movements and
shadows. She advised them how to take shots which would not endanger their own forces
on the ground. Most of all, she invoked upon them a spirit of togetherness as well as a
will for survival. If the archers and slingers moved in concert, their attacks would be so
much more powerful. If they became one in purpose with the ground forces that lured the
dwarves into vulnerable positions, the dwarves would fall while they would remain
relatively safe. Despite the fact she was elf, she appealed to a sense of unity for their own
survival.
In the middle of such training, her focus was ripped from the humans. Upon the top of
the wall, her head jerked to the west and to the clearing that divided the town from the
hills. She gave no explanation to those she trained, other than an order for them to stand
ready. She directed their attention to the clearing. She did not profess the object of her
alarm, other than stating it was not the dwarves. She flew down a ladder with ease, a
product of climbing trees all her life. She sought out the ground forces, she called for Sy.
At the same time, Enin appeared for the first time since he left earlier that day. He also
called for Sy.
Sy moved away from his soldiers. Concern gripped his features. He looked to both at
the same time. "What is it?"
Holli yielded to the wizard.
"Goblins," Enin stated. "They're snooping around the walls."
Sy cursed as he looked to the edifice in the distance. "Are you sure?"
"I have felt them, too," Holli confirmed. "That is also why I am here."
"Damn." Sy heaved a frustrated sigh. "That's all we need."
Holli offered encouragement. "I agree it is not welcome, but it is not a terrible
situation. After all, we are prepared. At the very worst, we can use this event to assist in
the training of your people."
"I don't think that will be necessary," Enin announced.
Holli looked to the wizard with puzzlement.
Enin explained quickly. "They are not here to attack." He turned a glance to Holli.
"Since you didn't think I would be a help to you today, I spent my time working on a
spell to read thoughts. I was practicing on the townspeople as they trained. It was
amazing to see what they were thinking. In a strange way, most of them really want the
dwarves to attack, almost as if they want to prove something. Anyway, when I sensed the
goblins, I probed their thoughts. They are not here on a raid. They are here to investigate
what's going on. From the hills, they've seen our people on the wall. They saw the group
of elves enter through the south gate. They know we are preparing for something.
Apparently some serp, named Sazar I think, has sent them to find out more of what's
going on behind the wall. By his order, they are not to attack us."
"You have learned to read thoughts from that distance?" Holli asked with her surprise
evident.
"Yes," Enin happily acknowledged. "Yes, I have. It's easier when the person is up
close, like you are right now for instance, but if I use the magic to lock in on their
position and I focus the spell, I can read thoughts of any one that I can sense. You are
surprised by this? You didn't think I was going to just sit around and sulk all day? No, I
can see by your thoughts now that you didn't, but you didn't expect this either. I can read
your thoughts right now. This doesn't make you comfortable. You're thinking if I can do
this, I would be a dangerous enemy if the humans and elves ever went to war. Why do
you think this, especially at this moment?"
Holli replied quickly, but uneasily. "I am an elf guard. I must always think of the
protection of my camp."
Enin pressed her as he wore an almost smug grin of satisfaction. "But we're not in
your camp now. You're here to protect us. Why do you worry so much about a conflict
between the elves and the humans? I thought the dwarves were our common enemy?"
"That's enough, Enin," Sy spoke in the tone of command. "You have no right to ask
her such questions."
Enin laughed. He found the moment entertaining. "Maybe I do, and maybe I don't. It
was she who first mistrusted me. I'm not doing anything more than returning the favor. If
she feels uncomfortable with this, well now she knows how I feel."
Holli flashed a glare of anger. "How can I know how you feel? I can't read your
thoughts like you can mine."
"That's not what I mean and you know it," Enin rebuked the elf. "Remember who
you're dealing with here. I can read your thoughts now. Very clearly. Oh, you can keep
secrets from me, things you truly wish to conceal, but your reactions, no, you can't keep
those hidden. You don't like me questioning you any more than I appreciated you telling
me I was useless. Well, it seems I'm not so useless anymore."
"I never claimed you were useless. I said your power was dangerous. I still believe
that."
"I know you do," Enin grinned. He took delight in reminding Holli he could read her
thoughts before she spoke of them. It was not so much out of revenge, but more out of
redemption. His spells would help the town, as he just revealed the goblins intentions,
and her doubts would not stop him. "You spoke of my potential and that if I realized what
I was capable of that I might be frightened myself. I can see now what you think I might
become. It doesn't scare me. I know how I want to use that power. What did you think?
That I was going to take over the land? Chain your race?"
"No, I never doubted your intentions, but even now, I doubt your ability to fully
control what you can do. You need time and guidance. There is little of the first and none
of the second."
"And yet, I have revealed the intentions of the goblin party. Do you doubt this?"
"No, I can see that you have control over this spell."
"Is that why you were so worried about how I might use it against the elves?"
"I have already answered that question," Holli replied.
"Then answer this one, do you think my magic can now be used against the dwarves?"
"I would still advise against it."
"Why?"
The elf answered honestly, knowing that any lie would be immediately sensed by the
probing wizard. In truth, it did not change her answer. She would have spoken the same
reply even if she could close her thoughts to Enin. "Because the dwarves are different
than the goblins, they are different than the elves. They are resistant to magic. You would
not be able to sense them. You probably wouldn't be able to read their minds. Even if you
could read their intentions, how would that help us? We know why they are attacking.
What else could you do?"
"I could capture some. I have already proven that."
"Only a handful and you would exhaust yourself in the process."
"I don't know about that," Enin challenged. "I'm growing stronger. I know how to
capture and hold more energy. I won't tire like I did the first time."
Sy intervened. At first he was uncomfortable with the debate, but now he noticed his
soldiers watching with interest. He did not like the message being sent. The argument
spoke of division. He could not have it continue. He spoke with authority over both
wizard and elf. "That's enough from both of you. I can't have this, won't have it. You are
both needed to help protect this town. Your bickering is counter-productive to that goal.
Enin, I don't know why you're doing this. You're acting like a child. You're mad because
she thought you might be a danger if you started experimenting with the magic. That's
her opinion and she's entitled to it." Sy then turned to Holli. "But I don't agree with it. I
don't know how the magic works against dwarves. It may put us in danger, but I also
know we can't ignore a single advantage just because it may prove risky. If he can
capture a few dwarves in a force field, well that's a few less we have to deal with. That in
itself is worth something. As a soldier, you should know that."
"It will be as you will," Holli replied stoically, not offended by the captain's lecture.
"You're damn right it will." Sy then turned back to the wizard. "That goes for you, too.
No more outbursts because someone mistrusts you. Godson, I mistrusted you the first
time I learned of your power. Does that make me any less your friend? I don't think I rely
on anyone more than you."
Enin could not help but read the captain's thoughts. He smiled with good humor. "You
rely on Ryson more. At least that's what you believe. That's alright. It's not so bad to be
the second most trusted man in your command."
Sy rubbed his head, first in frustration. Suddenly, he laughed. He could not hold it
back. He shook his head in disbelief as he gazed at the wizard. "Are you going to be
doing this to me all the time now?"
"Not all the time," Enin joined him with a chuckle, "just most of the time." The
wizard's delight allowed him to face the elf with less antagonism. "I offer my apologies to
you. I was, like the captain said, acting like a child. In regard to my spells, I will also try
defer to your judgment. I have to admit, I also practiced my mind reading spell upon you
while you were training these people. I know you are sincere. I did not wish to accuse
you of anything. I just wanted you to understand my feelings toward your mistrust."
Holli answered as if the event never occurred. "Your apology is accepted. Let us put
that behind us. For now, we have other concerns. I still sense the goblins. Do you?"
Enin lifted his head, stared up over the wall to the west. He turned slightly to the south
and continued until he faced the southeast corner of town. "Yes. They are circling the
town, but they still have no intention of entering. They know that most of our people are
preparing for war, not just the soldiers. They have spotted some of the battlements by the
south gate. They find this all very interesting."
Sy searched for answers. "What do you think they're really up to?"
"It is like I said," Enin revealed, "they are out here because the serp wants more
information. I can see little about this serp. They seem very confused about him, like they
can't think straight."
"That is not surprising," Holli offered. "The serps have the ability to manipulate the
thinking of most of these creatures. If they could think clearly around the serp, they
would probably not follow it."
"What do you think the serp wants?" Sy posed the obvious question to Holli.
"I imagine the serp is interested as to the reason for the increased activity in your
town. They are opportunists. Perhaps, it thinks it can gain something from our trouble."
"Can it?"
"I doubt it. Look at your walls. They are filled with archers ready to test their new
found skill. Have you ever been more prepared for a raid?"
"No."
"I'm sure the serp will also realize this. My guess is that it will wait to see what
happens next."

Sazar waited on a hilltop far to the west of Burbon. His scouts would return soon.
Most of the puzzle was coming together. A few pieces were missing, but nothing which
would make him question the inevitable. The war he wished for was at hand.
The only thing that truly bothered him at this moment was the departure of the delver.
He went north, left quickly and alone. Why?
He would have to wait for this answer. The goblin scouting party made their return
known. They struggled through the tall grass to make their report. They said nothing
which he did not expect. He sent them away.
He stood not so alone, his shag waited close-by, hiding in the hill grass. He spoke,
however, only to himself.
"The alliance is firm. More elves join the humans, train them. They will fight together
against the dwarves. They expect an attack, expect it soon. They also expect it to be large.
They are well prepared. Their defense seems clear.
"I wonder how much the dwarves of Dunop would pay for such information. They
may already know much of this. If so, they would not reward me. I am certain they must
know of the alliance between the elves and humans. They would be foolish if they didn't.
As for the preparedness of Burbon, they can find out much by tunneling underneath. I
doubt they would be willing to pay for anything I could tell them.
"I could offer them an alliance. If they fight alone against two races, they might accept
joining with my goblins. We could offer ranged attacks with crossbows. That would
certainly help against the planned defense. But the dwarves are so stubborn. They will
believe themselves superior regardless of the planned defenses.
"And I still do not know the position of the algors. The dwarves may already have an
ally. The elves and the delver came back from the Lacobian alone. It is quite possible the
algors refused them. The question is did they join the dwarves instead. Now, I come back
to the delver. Why did he leave? Is he against the war? If so, why did he go with the elves
to the Lacobian? If not, why did he leave just before battle?"
Sazar flipped his tail back and forth with his thoughts. He agonized over details now,
trying to find the most lucrative means for taking advantage of the war soon to be fought.
"The humans will not trust me. That is certain. They also have the help of the elves,
therefore they will not be desperate either. I can offer them little. A bargain maybe, a
cessation of hostilities for a price. They may be willing to pay much for that. If they do
not have to worry about us, they can turn their attention completely to the dwarves. Of
course, that doesn't mean I have to honor that bargain. If the humans are weakened in
battle, we could easily use the tunnel to attack and take what is left.
"At the same time, the dwarves have much in the way of gold and light gems. I might
be able to offer the services of my goblins as a diversion. That tactic always appeals to
them."
The thought of the light gems and the gold struck a cord with the Sazar. Yes, the
dwarves had the most to offer, but did he have to wait for an offer? There was a chance
he could simply take what the wanted. His thoughts spilled over the possibilities.
"The humans expect a large attack. If that is true the dwarves will tunnel directly from
Dunop to Burbon. The path will be there for us. Win or lose, any dwarf attack will tire
their forces. The moment will be right. That is what I must wait for."

The Colad Mountains - rough travel, difficult terrain, even for a delver; from a
distance, they stood as a wall. At their base, they shamed even the most prideful with
their majesty. Each monument of rock boasted a snow-capped peak. The steep slopes
ranged from jagged rock paths to sheer cliff faces adorned with sprawling waterfalls.
Though this range of powerful mountains could not stop a delver, they could hinder
one. They forced Ryson to slow his pace, coerced him to consider many of his paths. He
struggled with more than one climb. He often second-guessed his choices, especially
when he found himself facing a sheer vertical slope, or on an isolated ledge with little
options right or left, and no paths forward. During the first dark, he slowed his pace to a
near crawl. His night vision allowed him to see as well as in the day, but the ground
became moist, the rock slippery. He would have sought better terrain. Then again, he
wouldn't find the cliff behemoths in the valleys.
The delver felt only one true fear, not of falling but of taking too much time. His goals
were not without deadlines. He wanted to save Burbon from the dwarves, he wanted to
save Dunop from the shadow trees and the sand giants, and he wanted to stop the war
before it intensified to a point of no end. Time for each of these remained limited. Each
pause, each delay was like a pin prick in the back of his brain. Unfortunate but true, the
mountains were not an adventure to him now, they were an obstacle.
He didn't seek the peaks at first. He rounded the leading mountains only halfway up
their side. As he continued northward, he pressed further and further up each slope he
encountered. He walked above the tree line, climbed with mountain goats, touched snow
for the first time this season. A cold wind blasted him like an unwelcome visitor. He was
thankful for his thick wool coat. The footing became rocky, treacherous. At these heights,
the air was thin. He adapted quickly, the blessing of a delver, but the first few climbs
were not without rests. Soon, however, he was racing to the very heights of each
mountain without pause.
He took to the peaks with only one hope, to find signs of the cliff behemoths. Still, as
a delver, he could not ignore the staggering view. At these heights, the land opened up
before him. Behind him, to the south, he could see all the way back to Dark Spruce
Forest. To the west, he thought he could see signs of the ocean. A mist kept him from
being sure. Taller, more striking mountains waited to the north. Ryson knew he would
find cliff behemoths here. They would direct him to Dzeb.
He moved on instinct, listening to the wind, smelling the rock. His heightened delver
senses would seek out the object of his pursuit. As he became more and more accustomed
to the terrain, he moved with greater speed and certainty. His haste was rewarded.
Upon a lonely ledge, a single cliff behemoth eyed him with an apparent struggle
between apathy and interest. It was not Dzeb, but it was certainly a cliff behemoth. His
mammoth size was a simple testament to that. The rock-hard hide, the massive fingers,
the simple rounded head, and most of all the innocence of expression; these traits endured
unmistakably.
Ryson surged with joy upon sighting the behemoth, an exultation greater than simply
meeting one of his objectives. The gentle giants were a blessing to this land. They were
so simple in purpose, so pure in being. The word of Godson, that was all they lived for,
that was what guided their every thought, their every action. The innocence which
surrounded each behemoth shined beyond their simplicity. They were an aberration. No
other creature in the land could boast of greater power. No army would stand a chance
against a host of these giants. The land was theirs for the taking, yet no such desire
existed within them. So much power, so much strength, yet all devoted to the simple
word of Godson, devoted to peace. The sight of such a creature encouraged faith. Ryson's
own purpose strengthened.
The delver moved up quickly to the behemoth, feeling no fear in approaching a
creature with the strength to make a shag envious. Ryson danced over the rocks, leapt
from one ledge to another as if he could fly. In an instant, he shared the same ledge as the
giant.
The cliff behemoth did little in the way of moving. He remained on his perch, a large
boulder half-imbedded in the cliff face. He sat comfortably with his legs hugging the
front of the boulder. His hands were folded together in his lap. He would have appeared
oblivious to the delver had it not been for his eyes which remained glued upon his visitor.
He made no other acknowledgment.
Ryson beamed. He took no exception to the giant's motionless response. He had
already learned of the cliff behemoths apparent aloofness. It was simply their way. It was
not out of arrogance. Instead, such reactions generated from their religion. Nothing short
of an angel of Godson could stir them from their calm acceptance of the land and what if
offered. Ryson, however, did notice the giant's gaze. If nothing else, it was an honor
simply to be recognized by the divine.
"Good day," Ryson stated with a broad smile.
"Good day to you, delver." The behemoth's voice was as gentle as his expression.
It was no surprise to Ryson that the behemoth knew of his race. He did nothing to hide
it when he climbed to reach the giant. "Yes, I'm a delver. My name is Ryson Acumen."
The giant's eyes revealed only the slightest surprise. "That explains much. I sense
Godson within you."
"Thank you.
"I am known as Cyan. How may I help you, Ryson Acumen?"
"I need to find Dzeb. It is very urgent."
Cyan did not respond immediately.
Ryson wondered if perhaps he did not know of the particular cliff behemoth. He
offered a simple note of description. "Do you know who I speak of? He was with me on
Sanctum Mountain. He helped saved the land."
"Godson saved the land," Cyan corrected. "Dzeb was simply the tool he chose."
"Then you know of him?"
"I do."
"I need to find him. I need his help again." Ryson felt the need to explain, to give a
reason as to why Cyan should reveal Dzeb's whereabouts. "I'm afraid there's great trouble
in the land again. I'm trying to stop a war."
Cyan's eyes dropped from the delver. It appeared as if this small but powerful word
had wounded him.
Ryson felt shame. He knew what the cliff behemoth was thinking, he could feel the
regret. Here was a near perfect being, living simply for his peaceful beliefs. It was more
than a shame that others could not live with such divinity, it was a tragedy. Again, he felt
the need to explain, to reveal that some hoped to stop this evil.
"It's all a misunderstanding. There's just so much blind anger. Things are just kind of
snowballing. A dwarf queen is angry about losing her son. She's blinded herself to the
truth and wants revenge. She's already ordered attacks on many different people, the
humans, the elves and the algors. It's almost hard to believe that not too long ago, we all
stood together to save the land."
Cyan placed his eyes back on the delver. He opened his mouth to correct Ryson, but
the delver did it for him.
"I'm sorry, to help Godson save the land," the delver allowed. "We were together, and
I know Godson was with us. I saw the angels. Maybe that's a big reason why I'm here
now. I just can't believe we went through all of that to simply throw it away now. I know
most of this must sound pretty silly to you, but I have to do whatever is necessary to stop
this."
Cyan replied with simple bliss. "I do not try to judge Godson's will. If He deems it
necessary to stop this war, rest assured He will. If not, you will be left to your own
designs."
Ryson did not know how to respond. He held to the belief that he had some control
over what might happen. That was surely another reason why he was now upon this
mountainside. "I have to try to do what I can."
"If that is what you believe." Cyan sounded less than certain and he showed very little
curiosity to the delver's problems. Still, he gave the needed information. "Dzeb normally
seeks the word upon His twelfth mountain."
At first, Ryson felt relief. He could find Dzeb. Unfortunately, he did not know which
one was the twelfth mountain of Godson. He revealed as much with a tone of uncertainty.
"I'm sorry, I don't know which mountain that is."
"Seek this peak," Cyan advised. "Look first to the heart of Godson's mountains, turn
but one step to His ocean and count but two peaks away. That is His twelfth mountain."
"Two peaks to the northwest," Ryson declared. Happiness washed over him for being
so close.
Cyan simply nodded in agreement.
"Thank you," Ryson offered his gratitude.
Cyan closed his eyes. He said nothing further. The behemoth's focus, his very
awareness settled upon his perfect memory of the word of Godson. He would meditate
upon this event for many days, considering the implications of what had happened and
what would come.
Ryson shrugged as he bid a simple farewell. He climbed with near ferocity to the
peak. He followed Cyan's instructions to the word. Instead of simply counting two peaks
to the northwest, he looked first to the heart of the mountains before him. He turned only
slightly toward the west, toward the ocean. Two obvious peaks stood directly in his path.
The second became his final destination.
He plummeted down from his perch as if he were free-falling. He let the steep slopes
do the work as he simply danced downward. His feet shuffled to keep balance. That was
all that was needed of them. Gravity propelled him.
Upon reaching the base, his head swerved about and upwards to allow focus on his
destination. The first mountain in his path was a mere obstacle. He rounded it with little
effort toward climbing and with even less regard.
With the second peak now completely in sight, he stopped to make a quick appraisal.
He would find Dzeb in the higher portion, but which side? He could not guess. He would
have to search further as he climbed.
His legs pumping like pistons, his hands pulling him over ledges, Ryson ascended the
bottom half of this mountain in a blur. Tall pines which covered the base served as much
as ladders as they did as obstacles. Once above the tree line, he relied upon the jagged
ledges of the mountain side. Loose rocks remained a danger, but so perfect was his
balance that even when a handhold gave way, he remained in control of his climb.
As he closed upon the peak, he slowed his pace. He began searching the rocks. He
spied many cavities and large boulders, all of which could have hid the cliff behemoth
from his sight, or even several of the gentle giants.
"I wonder how many are up here on this one," he wondered aloud.
Again, he could not guess. He began to alter his path. Instead of taking a direct
ascension, he began to cut a diagonal course over the mountainside. He peered into many
a rock formation, but found nothing. Frustration loomed. He felt the pressure of time
once more. He called for the cliff behemoth.
"Dzeb! Dzeb, it's Ryson, Ryson Acumen!"
No reply.
"Can you hear me?! I need to talk to you."
He heard only the echo of his voice. He grunted with dissatisfaction. He looked to the
peak. He could reach it quickly. Upon that ridge, he would be able to look down and
perhaps spot his objective from a new perspective. As he reached the precipice, his search
came to an end.
The cliff behemoth known as Dzeb stood stoically with eyes searching the skies. He
made no acknowledgment to the delver. It was a question as to whether or not he even
knew Ryson was there. His back remained to the delver and he made no attempt to turn.
If not for the green tunic, Dzeb appeared just like another rock, a statue carved in the
image of a simple giant.
Ryson's excitement jumped. He ran to the behemoth, rounded his side to face him. His
smile grew as he felt Dzeb's warm eyes wash over him.
"It is good to see you, Ryson Acumen," Dzeb welcomed.
"It's good to see you," Ryson admitted. "I've been looking for you."
"And so you have found me."
Ryson did not want to appear assertive, and he voiced his reservations. "I hope I'm not
disturbing you. It's just that I have an important need."
"You are always welcome here," Dzeb replied with such innocence. "Godson still
smiles upon you. His blessing warms the very space you fill."
The statement humbled the delver. It was difficult for him to respond. The cliff
behemoth was the most spiritual creature he had ever met. He could never consider
himself an equal in such regard. Still, his need was great. If a perceived blessing would
help him, he would not ignore the opportunity. "I can't say if this is the will of Godson or
not, but I know it is important. Will you listen to a request?"
"Only the foolish would disregard the thoughts of one who stands in such light. What
is your request?"
Ryson began with Yave's actions as he understood them. He described the attacks of
the dwarves on the algors, the elves and the humans. He noted the sadness in Dzeb's
expression as he detailed the losses. The sadness only grew when he spoke of the elves
intentions to unleash the shadow trees. The anguish appeared to turn to abhorrence as
Ryson announced the algors plan to use sand giants to counter-attack. He hoped such
signs of emotion were but a precursor to Dzeb's acceptance to help.
"I just can't let this go on like this," Ryson continued. "I can't imagine how many will
die if this madness isn't stopped. And it is madness. You were there. You know what's
true. The algors weren't responsible for Tun's death. Yave is allowing her grief to spread.
That's wrong. When I look back at what we did at Sanctum, I'm proud. We stood
together. Yave is killing that. This war is destroying what we accomplished. I think its
destroying what was meant to be."
For the second time that day, a cliff behemoth corrected Ryson on his interpretations.
"No one of this land can destroy what Godson dictates. The land was saved, the sphere
was destroyed. That was Godson's wish. This war you describe can not change that."
Ryson was slightly taken aback. "But it can. I mean, it can't bring the sphere back. I'm
not worried about that, but it can destroy the land, or at least part of it. This war could get
out of hand. An entire race can perish. That's not what happened at Sanctum. We were all
brought together to save the land. I'm sure you would say that Godson brought us
together. I won't argue that. But now, now it's all falling apart and the very events at
Sanctum are at the core of this. I can't believe that's what Godson wants."
"We are not always blessed with knowledge of Godson's intentions. It is not ours to
question."
"I'm sure it's not, but we still have to act within our own conscience. We have a
chance to stop this war. That's why I'm here. I want you to come back with me. I want
you to go with me to the dwarf city of Dunop. Yave can dispute me, but she can't dispute
the word of a cliff behemoth."
Dzeb looked away. There was sorrow on his face.
The cliff behemoth's hesitancy hit Ryson like a falling anvil. He never expected even a
chance of Dzeb declining. He expected immediate acceptance. It was not there.
"I don't really think it's dangerous," Ryson spouted. He did not really think this was
the cause for Dzeb's initial reaction, but he was at a loss for any other explanation. "I
doubt the dwarves would even threaten you with any harm."
"I do not fear the dwarves," Dzeb replied simply, but his voice now carried the same
reluctance which remained in his vacant stare.
Ryson scrambled for an understanding of Dzeb's position. "Does that mean you'll help
me?"
"I don't know what kind of assistance I can offer you."
Ryson swept his hand over the top of his head and down to the back of his neck. He
kneaded his own tightening muscles as his anxiety began to balloon. "All I want you to
do is tell the truth. Everyone knows that cliff behemoth's can do nothing else. Tell the
dwarves that the algors were not responsible for Tun's death. Tell Yave that what she's
doing is wrong. That should be enough to stop this thing."
"What if it wasn't meant to be stopped?"
Ryson's eyes nearly bulged with bewilderment. "Excuse me?"
Dzeb spoke with simple reason, with no inflection of emotion. "You are asking me to
interfere in the workings of the land. I am not so sure that interference is justified."
"How can it not be?" Ryson blurted.
"As I said before, it is not ours to question the will of Godson."
"So you're saying Godson may want this war? You can't really mean that?"
"No, I don't. Godson does not want war, but He does sometimes leave the workings of
the land to itself."
"I don't understand what you're saying. Is it that you don't want to help me?"
"I would like to help you. As I said, it would be foolish to disregard the thoughts of
someone like yourself, but what you ask has the potential for great impact. You wish me
to get involved with the decisions and the actions of others. If you would have your way,
you would have me dictate to others what they can and what they can not do. That is not
my place. It is only Godson that may make such a decision."
Confusion continued to haunt the delver. He was not prepared to debate Dzeb. He
thought his only difficulty would be in finding the cliff behemoth. His astonishment
spewed forth in his words. "Do I understand you right? You don't want to help because
you think it would be like interfering in other people's business? Well, so what if it is?
We're talking about a lot of innocent lives. We're talking about stopping a war. You can't
possibly be against that."
"I am against clashing with the will of Godson," Dzeb answered simply.
Ryson surged with confusion. "You know, you're talking in circles. You said Godson
wouldn't want a war. That's what I'm trying to stop. If you follow the word of Godson,
you should want to do the same thing."
Dzeb shook his head. "It is not my right to question Godson's will. If he wishes it to be
stopped, he will stop it."
"Maybe Godson wants us to stop it. Maybe that's why I'm here, talking to you now.
Isn't that possible?"
"If He did want this war stopped, I would not be able to refuse Him."
"Maybe you are right now."
"I could not."
Ryson heaved a heavy breath of frustration.
"Look, we're not getting anywhere and what's worse, I don't understand why. As far as
I can tell, you admit that Godson wouldn't want a war. At the same time, you say you
won't do anything to stop it. Explain that to me."
Most of the time, faith can not be explained. Questioning a cliff behemoth about
Godson was like questioning why water was wet. At this moment, however, Dzeb made
the attempt to clarify his meaning. Perhaps, he was simply justifying his position for his
own conscience, or perhaps he simply felt the need to explain himself to the delver.
"Godson does not impose his will on everything, on every creature that walks this
land. It is ours to decide whether to accept his guidance or not. I have accepted the word
of Godson. I do not question His intentions. I also do not force my opinions on others. It
would be prideful to make such an attempt. I am simply a follower of the word. It is not
my place to force my interpretations on others. If Yave refuses the peaceful word of
Godson, her actions will speak of such. It is her right. It is also her responsibility. I can
not take that away from her. She must choose her path. It is how she will be judged."
The words stung at the delver. He could not accept this explanation. He wasn't trying
to stop Yave from choosing a path of religion, he was trying to stop a war. Why couldn't
Dzeb see that? "So if Yave chooses a direction which would endanger the lives of
hundreds, or even hundreds of thousands, we're all supposed to just accept that?"
"Yave must be free to choose her own way," Dzeb repeated. "I must not intervene, I
must not try to force my beliefs upon her. That is not the way of Godson."
Ryson gave up on his first course of logic. He turned, instead, upon the peaceful
beliefs of the cliff behemoths.
"Wait, wait. Just hold on. You're talking about how we have the freedom to make our
own decisions. Well, that's what you're facing right now. I need your help, but you seem
to be saying that it's alright if we just do nothing. Let's forget about Yave for a moment.
Let's just talk about you. I'm asking you to stop a war. You have the power to do that. Are
you refusing?"
"I am not refusing to stop a war. I am allowing others to determine their own way."
Ryson exploded. "Wrong! You are refusing. You're making a conscious decision not
to help. That's not something I would be proud of. It's something I would be ashamed of,
especially in the eyes of your faith! I'm not going to stand here and let you justify your
inaction by placing the blame on others. You have a responsibility to do what is right."
Dzeb showed no anger. "And what is right? Is it right for me to decide the destiny of
the entire land? Should I become dictator and tyrant?"
It was not a boast. The cliff behemoths in their power could control the land. Anyone
of them could become grand emperor and dictate the will of all, but the delver threw such
thoughts aside.
"That's not what I mean and you know it. I'm not asking you to take over, just to assist
me in bringing an end to this madness."
"I know you want me to interfere."
"You interfered at Sanctum."
"I was instructed by angels of Godson. I was the tool of Godson's will. I made no
decision without guidance."
"So that's how you're going to justify this?" Ryson demanded harshly. "Godson didn't
tell you to stop the war, so your inaction, your apathy, is acceptable? Do you have any
idea of how many innocents will die if this war isn't stopped?"
"It may be their time. If it is, nothing I could do would keep them in this existence."
Ryson shook his head. "None of what you're saying is reasonable."
"It does not have to be reasonable. It must only reflect my beliefs."
"And you believe you should stand here and do nothing?"
"I believe I should not interfere."
Ryson glared. His jaw grew tight with frustration. What could he say? Dzeb was
arguing based on religion, not on logic. Whatever Ryson stated, the cliff behemoth could
use abstract points to debate the issue. With nothing else to grasp, he turned those same
abstract concepts to his own argument.
"You said you would need Godson's guidance before you acted. Last time you helped
us, Godson sent angels to direct you. What if this time He's sending me?"
Dzeb paused. He had no quick reply. Finally he responded with a question of his own.
"Why would He send you?"
"He wanted to. It's part of my destiny. You said I was blessed."
"I did not mean you were a messenger."
"But I could be."
Again, Dzeb hesitated. "I do not know."
"But you have to make a decision. If I am that messenger, you will have turned against
Godson."
For the first time, emotion hung in Dzeb's reply. "I do not turn against Godson. I have
accepted Godson. I live by the word," he responded as if offended.
Ryson pressed the point. "Maybe, but if I am a messenger you will have refused none
the less."
"You are speaking in riddles, trying to use my faith against me."
"And you're trying to use your faith as an excuse to keep from doing what's right. You
are responsible for your decision? Will you help?"
Dzeb closed his eyes, stood as if searching his own soul. Finally, he answered with
marked sorrow. "I can not. When I helped you with Sanctum, I knew in my heart I was
carrying out the will of Godson. There was no doubt. Today, now, there is doubt. If you
were truly a messenger of Godson, those doubts would not exist."
Ryson swelled with emotion - sorrow, disappointment, anger, fear, and confusion. He
did not know what to do now. He never believed Dzeb would refuse him. He had nothing
left, no where else to turn. His fingers messaged his forehead.
“So you won’ come with me?”
“No.”
“Is there anything I can say that would change this.”
Dzeb looked away. “No.”
"I can't believe this," he muttered, his voice filled with the exhaustion of his emotions.
A pain erupted in Dzeb. His eyes glistened. "I am truly sorry you feel this way. I wish
I could make you understand."
"I don't think you can," Ryson admitted. "I'll try, and I'll try not to blame you, but I
think what you're doing is wrong."
He said nothing further. The delver simply turned to the south. He could do nothing
now but leave the mountains.

Ruins - destroyed buildings, crumbled roads, crushed carts, and ransacked stores - this
was the sight which welcomed Ryson upon his arrival to Connel. Smoke still plumed
from burnt out homes. Rubble waited in every alley. Bridges spilled over the water in
tattered shreds. For every building that stood unscathed, another three lay in devastation.
What was left of this city was nothing like the Connel that Ryson remembered.
It had been over a season since he walked these streets. Once he made his
commitment to Linda and to Burbon, Connel was no longer his home. Yet, he could not
avoid the pain of seeing this destruction. Though he had left it, Connel still represented a
part of his life. To see it in ruins was to see his memories crushed.
Ryson walked slowly through the debris. While disbelief weighed upon his shoulders,
little else served as an obstacle. Most of the main streets were cleared. The shredded
remains of broken stands and merchant carts were simply pushed aside, mixed with the
waste of crumbled walls and store-fronts. This meager attempt of cleanup did little to
diminish the picture of utter chaos. He walked like a mindless zombie, captivated and
discouraged by this grievous spectacle.
He was not alone. Shock gripped the stragglers on the streets. He assumed them to be
residents burned out of their homes. They walked in the same daze, staring vacantly,
moving with no destination, most just walked past him without notice as if he was just
another lamp post.
Soldiers also stalked the streets. They, however, moved in large groups, much larger
than normal patrols. In walking a mere five blocks, he encountered three separate groups
of heavily armed men. Some expressed fear, some anger, but they obviously did not see
Ryson as a threat. They ignored the delver, treated him as just another homeless
castaway.
One word burned in his mind, one word held the answer to all of this.
"Dwarves," Ryson cursed.
Just as Burbon had been attacked so too was Connel, but obviously with a greater
force. Ryson could only wonder as to how many dwarves comprised the assault.
Obviously many. This much destruction could not have been carried out by a mere few
dozen. Ryson was well aware of Connel's armed strength. The city housed thousands of
soldiers, and many delver scouts as well. For the dwarves to wreak this much havoc, they
must have sent at least a thousand warriors. The fighting, the slaughter, it must have been
beyond brutal.
Fighting these horrific images, Ryson moved onward. He sought the Church of
Godson and the Reader Matthew. This was the reason he came to Connel. He found
himself walking faster and faster as panic crept over him. He worried over the well-being
of the reader. He imagined the church destroyed, the reader mortally wounded in the
rubble. He tried to cast away these apprehensions. He failed. Over and over, his
imagination played out the worst possible scenarios.
Worse, he considered why Connel was attacked. Burbon and Connel, the elf camp,
even the algors; these were the targets of the dwarf attacks. Why? The answer haunted
him. He was considered an enemy to the dwarves, just like the elves and the algors. Yave
would seek him out. She would order the attack of his home just as she ordered the attack
of Lief and Holli's camp. Burbon was his new home, Connel was his old. He had brought
this upon these people. He had brought this devastation. The thought crashed upon him.
Everything that happened here was because of him.
Though he found the strength to momentarily press aside his guilt, he cold not cast
away his fear for the safety of the reader. If Yave ordered attacks upon those remotely
connected to Tun's death, then certainly Matthew was a potential target. It was at
Connel's Church of Godson where those who would assault Sanctum first met. Matthew,
though he did not enter Sanctum, played a major role. He might indeed have been a target
himself. Ryson was certain that if Yave had her way, the church would probably have
been razed.
The thought brought even more despair. His fear pressed him faster, like a whip at his
backside. He battled with it, fought for control. He did not race with the speed of a
delver. Though Connel was now used to such a sight, he did not want to send the soldiers
into a panic. He did, however, match the pace of a trotting human.
Passing near mindless wanderers and concerned soldiers, he ignored more than one
question as to his hurry. The destruction he passed faded from his focus, his purpose
fixed upon one sole destination.
When it finally came into view, he welcomed his own relief. From a distance, his eyes
narrowed on the church's outline. There was no sign of damage. He slowed slightly, but
his desire to see his friend moved him beyond a slow walk. While maintaining the grace
of a softly floating cloud, he dashed up the tall stone steps of the church and bounded
through the front door. The momentary spell of relief disintegrated in an instant.
This was not the place Ryson remembered. It was not the place where algor, elf,
dwarf, human and delver met to deal with Sanctum. It was not a Church of Godson. It
was no longer a place of worship at all, but a hospital.
Instead of waiting seats for faithful followers, beds lined the expanse of the church's
open interior. The benches were removed. They rested haphazardly atop each other off to
the side. Instead of a simple alter, the front of the room stood covered with blood soaked
sheets. There was no joy of faith in this room, there was only suffering and slow agony.
Attendants moved about with empty hands and sorrowful expressions. The patients no
longer called for them. The injured and dying knew there was nothing for them. Meager
bandages barely covered their wounds and little else covered their frail bodies. The lucky
ones were sheltered in old, dusty wool blankets. Others made due with old clothes for
covers.
The sight of this horror was burden enough for the delver, but the sound was haunting.
The silence overwhelmed him. A few soft moans or sick coughs broke it for a heart beat,
but it would return like some unrelenting fog. It held more than despair, it held shock.
Ryson moved with heaviness, as if the silence was a weight upon his shoulders. He
sought an attendant, someone he believed he recognized. He remembered her name as
Rachael, a follower of this church. He hoped she would direct him to Matthew.
His stealth startled her. He apologized as he greeted her.
"Sorry. I didn't mean to sneak up on you. I just didn't want to disturb anyone."
She looked vacantly at him at first. She had been approached by so many relatives
looking for lost family members. She was never able to give them the news they wanted.
It had reached a point where she now recoiled from visitors. Then, a spark of recognition
brought a beam of hope to her face.
"Ryson?"
The delver returned the smile and he nodded.
"Thank Godson." She threw her arms around him.
Though surprised at the reaction, Ryson did not retreat from her. He returned her hug.
"Are you alright?"
Rachael nearly laughed at the inane question. She released him and moved to an arm's
length. "Is anyone alright? I guess I'm better than most. I'm just so glad to see you."
Ryson spoke a single word in the form of a question, simply to confirm his obvious
suspicions. "Dwarves?"
Rachael's expression went gray. She spoke as if recalling a nightmare. "Thousands of
them. It was terrible." Her voice cracked and she had to stop.
"It's alright. You don't have to say anymore. I think I understand."
Rachael forced herself to speak further. "Then explain it to me. I'm so confused. I
remember the dwarves coming here before. They were here to help. Matthew told us all
of what happened at Sanctum. The dwarves were on our side. One of them even died to
save the land. Why are they doing this now?"
Ryson spoke as soothing as possible. "Because they lost sight of what happened. It
was the queen's son who died. She wants to blame us all for his death. It doesn't make
any sense, but that's what's happening."
Rachael simply shook her head.
Ryson did not want to dismiss her questions, but again time made its demands. He
moved to the point of his appearance. "I'm here trying to stop all of this. I'm here to see
Matthew. I need his help."
Rachael's expression of confusion was now clouded with sorrow. She obviously did
not want to speak words of explanation. She dropped her gaze to the floor. She
floundered with uncertainty. She finally spoke, but it was more of a disheartened whisper.
"I'll bring you to him. Follow me."
Ryson followed, his delver curiosity matching his apprehension. He moved behind
Rachael, walked in her footsteps to the reader's back room. Another sight of tragedy
greeted him.
Just as the benches had been cleared away, so too was the reader's desk. A single bed
rested in the middle of the room. Matthew slept there, pasty white and frail. He appeared
older than the delver remembered. While sleeping, Matthew's chest rose and fell as if
breathing was a constant struggle. His arms rested over his covers, the gray color of his
hands seemed to blend into the dingy tint of the sheets. Other than the fading yellowness
of some bruises, there were no other signs of injury around his upper body. Ryson's gaze
followed the outline of the reader's form beneath the sheet which covered him. One of his
legs did not show through. Ryson groaned.
The noise woke the reader. His vision, clouded at first, slowly found the delver. His
eyes cleared as again the sight of Ryson brought joy to his beholder. Matthew grinned,
laughed with relief until he coughed. The weakness in his body could not overcome his
delight.
"I can't believe it's you," the reader marveled.
"It is." Ryson attempted to maintain high spirits. "I guess I've been away too long.
How are you holding up?"
Matthew laughed again. "You have a delver's eye. You tell me. Are you going to
pretend you didn't notice my leg, or the absence of one?"
"I noticed. I still want to know how you're feeling now."
"It's not my time, if that's what you're worried about."
Rachael could not hold back a sob.
Matthew looked at her with comforting eyes. "It's alright, Rachael. You have to stop
worrying about me. I'm going to be fine." The reader redirected his attention back to the
delver. "For some reason they don't believe that. I guess they think I'm just fooling
myself. I tell you, though, I really believe it. Godson doesn't want to take me now.
There's more for me to do. Don't know what it is, but I'm still in the grand plan. Do you
believe that?"
Ryson considered all that was happening, all that had happened. "I've learned to
believe about anything now. I know how strong your faith is. If you believe it, it's
probably true."
Matthew heaved a heavy sigh. "It's good to finally hear that." He turned back to
Rachael. "Did you hear him? He believes me, and he's been touched by Godson."
Ryson felt a twinge of embarrassment. He felt uncomfortable with such statements. It
distanced him from others. He did not want that, did not want to be considered a prophet
or a holy relic.
Matthew ignored the delver's momentary blush. His attention remained fixed upon
Rachael. "Why can't the rest of you believe me? I tell you I'm not going to die, yet you
keep coming in here thinking it's the last time you'll see me."
Rachael rattled off her fears. "The doctor. He said your time was short. You lost too
much blood and your wound was not healing."
"Phhh! Doctors. They're all nothing more than witch doctors and snake oil salesmen.
When I get out of this bed and start hobbling around on a cane, they'll look at me like a
medical mystery. The fools might even call it some kind of miracle. They wouldn't know
a miracle if it spat in their faces. I'll get better and it won't be any damn miracle."
Matthew suddenly blushed himself. "Sorry, I didn't mean to curse, but it's true. It's just
not my time."
Ryson flashed a smile toward Rachael. "I think you better believe him. He may try to
get up sooner than he's ready just to prove he's right."
Rachael looked to Ryson with expectant hope. She spoke to him as if he was the holy
symbol he did not wish to be. "Do you really think he will get well?"
Ryson weighed his answer. He did not want to give this woman false hope, but did not
want to crush her spirits, or the reader's. He searched for a noncommittal answer. As he
did, he looked upon the reader. He saw a spark of life. In that instant, he began to believe
himself that it was just not Matthew's time. Despite the reader's pale cheeks, the grey
pallor which covered his exposed arms, Ryson sensed an urgency to live.
"Yes. I don't think he's going to die, not yet anyway. There's something about him…I
don't know why, but he's not going anywhere." His words hung in the room like the notes
of a triumphant choir. Matthew reveled in the glory of the statement. Tears rolled down
Rachael's face.
Ryson's own smile grew broader. "I hope you can learn to get around with just a
cane."
"I'll get along fine."
"I'm sure you will."
Rachael bubbled over with enthusiasm. After many long days of trying to console the
inconsolable, she finally grasped a piece of hope for herself. She wished to share her joy.
"If you don't mind, I'd like to leave you two alone. I want to tell some of the others."
She didn't wait for an answer. She nearly ran from the room.
Matthew shook his head. "I don't know why they're so concerned about me. Even if it
was my time, they shouldn't consider it such a loss. I'm not so special."
"Evidently you are," Ryson quipped.
"Well, I shouldn't be."
"Hey, you said it yourself. You still have a destiny here - something important,
something about a grand plan. Isn't that how you put it?"
Matthew fell short of complete agreement. "That doesn't mean I'm more important
than any other follower of Godson. If something happens to me, the task will fall upon
someone else."
Ryson rubbed his hands together. "I don't think you believe that. Otherwise you would
have accepted what the doctor said about you. You probably would have given up and
died by now."
Matthew simply shrugged.
Ryson moved on. "Why don't you tell me how this happened, how were you hurt?"
Matthew strained to repeat the tale of destruction. The memories obviously pained
him. He spoke with grunts of dread as he recounted the scene. "Waves of dwarves
attacked at twilight, appearing right out of the ground, crashing out of buildings and onto
the streets. Thousands of them, heavily armored, they lashed out at everything in their
path. They growled like angry lions and swarmed through the streets like wasps ousted
from their nest, but there was also method to their seemingly deranged assault.
"It seemed as if each cluster had its own purpose, some more deadly than others.
Formations of dwarves would cross in the streets, ignoring each other but always bent on
their independent objectives. To and fro, tightly woven groups of them rambled through
the open streets as even more emerged from hidden underground tunnels. With such
division, tracking them became an impossible. It was just as impossible to know which
set of dwarves would openly attack, which would sack the stores of food and supplies, or
which would simply set upon destroying the structures of the city.
"The constant barrage, the continuing movement, it all added to the confusion. They
kept the soldiers in disarray, the people in panic. The only saving grace rested in the fact
that the dwarves were slow and did not use ranged weapons. As long as their intended
targets remained out of reach, the dwarves could not cause injury.
"Unfortunately, the soldiers were expected to battle these dwarves, to stop them.
Every confrontation was one-sided. The casualties to the army was too numerous to
count, the devastation too horrible to recall. Hundreds dead in just the first moments."
Matthew then turned to his own downfall. "I heard the screams from the streets.
Godson, you would have had to have been deaf not to. I herded many of the townspeople
into the church. It felt safe and the dwarves seemed to ignore us. They appeared more
interested in the merchant stores. I guess a Church of Godson meant little to them, or
perhaps they worried about some kind of sacrilege. I don't know what kind of religion
they practice. Whatever the case, they left us alone. From the top of the steps, I could
barely see a battle take place down the road. It seemed to be growing darker with each
scream I heard, and the screaming didn't stop. But for some reason, I could make out the
shapes of this battle. I counted only about ten dwarves. They went through thirty humans
soldiers as if they were facing paper cut outs. They didn't kill them all. I heard a few cries
for help. I couldn't ignore it. I tried to move quietly. Godson, I was scared. I could hear
two or three of our men calling for help, whispering really, but I couldn't move fast. I was
so worried the dwarves would hear me. Truthfully, I wanted to turn back. I kept trying to
force the fear out of my head. It didn't work very well. I just about moved like a snail to
get to them. The whole time all I could think of was what might happen to me. I did
everything I could to keep from being seen. I even tried to stay in the shadows."
"They can see very well in the dark," Ryson interrupted.
Matthew snickered within a cough. "I should have guessed that. I know they live in
caves. But I really wasn't thinking. I was too scared. I finally reached what was left of the
soldiers. The first few I checked were dead. I didn't hear any more cries. I began to think
I was too late. I heard one gasp and I moved to a soldier near the edge of the road. He
was hurt bad, but not fatally. If I could get him back to the church, I could save him. I
never got the chance."
Matthew paused. He steadied himself as he recalled his last memories of that night.
"When I started to lift the soldier, I caught movement ahead of me. A dwarf had snuck up
to my position. A female warrior. She didn't look happy. I guess I wasn't a threat as a
reader of this church, but I became one when I tried to help the soldier. She pierced the
man I was trying to help in the middle of his chest with her broadsword. She then took a
slash at my hip. You know, I didn't feel any pain, but I saw my leg topple out from under
me. It really was a strange sight. I know I must have lost my balance almost immediately,
but I seemed to be hanging in the air forever. The next thing I remember I was here. I've
been told a few of the church followers saw me leave to help the soldiers. They followed
behind and brought me back, put a tourniquet on what was left of my leg. I have no idea
who it was. The only thing I can really see clearly is the face of that soldier when the
dwarf woman finished him off. He felt it. I know it."
The reader coughed. He endeavored to press these blood soaked images from his
mind, but they would never release him. This particular nightmare would never fade
completely from his consciousness. It would become the sole event which would always
remind him of the brutality which was possible in this world. Whether he lived only one
more day or one hundred more cycles of the season, he would never forget the carnage of
this single battle.
The narration haunted Ryson as well. He pictured what might have happened had the
dwarves focused their strength on Burbon instead of Connel. What if they attacked there
with thousands instead of just a few? What if they are planning to do so tonight? The
question caused an ache, and yet again, he felt the pressure of time. Each moment which
passed, Burbon remained vulnerable, Linda remained in danger. He had to move quickly,
but unfortunately, he had no further moves to make. He came to the church hoping for
advice from the reader, perhaps the reader might accompany him to Lief’s camp in Dark
Spruce. He hoped if he could reassemble those that stood at Sanctum, it might carry more
weight in convincing Petiole to not use the seeds of the shadow trees. He knew it would
be asking the reader to take a great risk, but now, with the reader's injury, such a request
moved beyond difficult and into the realm of impossible.
Matthew seemed oblivious to Ryson's contemplations. He continued his narrative with
a dull sorrow as he described the aftermath of the attack.
"Most people are homeless. At least two thirds of the structures sustained damage. I
haven't seen for myself, but some of the other followers have scouted around town.
They've been trying to set up temporary shelters. They're trying to rebuild as quick as
possible. Not a good time for that. It's not like it's the beginning of the growing season.
Dormancy will be here in a matter of days. I can feel the chill of the wind even in here.
"It's a good thing we have a new mayor, an honest one. She's getting the people
together, but she's facing many problems. The army has to rebuild, and people that might
be helping in the construction are training for war. We have no idea if the dwarves will
come back.
"That in itself has created another problem. A good many people are leaving now.
They're just picking up and heading east, out into the plains. Rumor is spreading that the
dwarves don't like the ground out there. It's too soft. They say the dwarves live mainly in
the hills and the mountains. They think they'll be safe in the flatlands.
"I don't know whether to believe that or not. I just know that most everyone's beyond
just being scared. It's fear and uncertainty mixed together. We didn't know why the
dwarves attacked. Even now that you've explained it to me, I have a hard time
understanding, and we don't know if they'll be back. I can have word sent to the mayor as
to what you have told me. She'll try to explain it to the people, but do you think they'll
accept it? Two seasons ago most everyone around here didn't even believe in dwarves.
This is insanity to them. People dead, the city destroyed, all by creatures of a dream.
"I guess we should be somewhat thankful. Most of the farms were completely
untouched. The stocks of grain in the silos remain. Those of us that stay, we won't starve,
but I don't know if we will survive the fear."
Matthew coughed again. Once in control of his breathing, he realized he had been
doing all the talking. He took a long look at Ryson and considered his appearance. He
saw the conflict, saw the doubt within the delver. It raised many questions. "You didn't
think you'd find us this way, did you? You didn't come here to help us with the dwarves;
you came here for something else."
"In truth, I came for your help," Ryson admitted candidly
Matthew's intuitiveness was rather remarkable, especially considering his situation.
"Was Burbon attacked as well?!"
"Yes, but not like this. They only sent a few. Our soldiers managed to fight them off.
We were very lucky."
"Then why did you come here?"
Ryson quickly explained his intentions. When he spoke of Dzeb's refusal, Matthew
displayed disbelief.
"He wouldn't offer his help?"
"He said it wasn't his place."
"So he would let everyone suffer?" Matthew seemed almost incredulous.
"I don't think that's how he sees it. I guess he thinks we're creating our own suffering
and it's up to us to stop it. Either that or he wants more of a sign form Godson. Maybe
you understand it better."
"I don't understand it at all. It's inexcusable." Matthew was rather resolute in his
judgment. His face soured at the thought of the cliff behemoth refusing to help.
Ryson offered solace so as to calm the wounded reader. "Don't be too hard on him. I
was at first. I was mad at him. That's hard. Just looking in their faces, all you can see is
peaceful content. It still bothered me he wouldn't help, but I started to think about it as I
was coming here. It may be a blessing that they can remain so detached from such things.
I mean, what would happen if the cliff behemoths started to think it was their right to
interfere in every single matter? I don't know how many of them live up in those
mountains, but I'm sure there's enough to basically take over. If they wanted to, I'm sure
they could dictate everything we do. "
"We're not talking that," Matthew objected. "We're talking about Dzeb's unwillingness
to stop this war."
"It may be the same thing," Ryson countered. "I know it sounds strange. I'm arguing
against my own point, but I'm also a delver. I have to examine things, learn from what I
see and hear. Dzeb doesn't want to help me, and at first that really angered me. It still
does. I think he should step forward. He was at Sanctum. He knows that what happened
was no one's fault. He should say so, but that's only my opinion. He has a reason for not
acting. Whether I accept it or not, I have to admit that the reason holds at least some
merit."
"You're defending him?"
"I don't think so. I'm just taking a hard look at what might happen if they interfered all
the time."
"Interference is not the equivalent of correcting a grievous error," Matthew stated
firmly.
Ryson shrugged. "I know, but that's his decision."
"So you came here to see if I would go with you to speak with this Petiole." Matthew
paused to contemplate the idea. "I would like to go, but I would have liked some time to
heal a bit more."
"I appreciate that, but I can't have you go with me now. It would probably kill you,
and you'd slow me down. I guess it doesn't really matter anymore. I can't think of
anything else to do. The dwarves won't listen to me. They'll continue to attack. The algors
will send their sand giants and the elves will drop the seeds. I guess it'll all be over soon
enough. No way to stop any of it now. It still bothers me, though, even after seeing all
this destruction. The entire city of Dunop shouldn't be destroyed just because one woman
went mad with grief. I only hope the delay I caused didn't lead to more deaths in Burbon.
That would be hard to live with."
"If that is the case, you can't blame yourself. You did what you thought you had to
do."
"It wasn't enough," Ryson responded sadly. "Anyway, if you're worrying about the
dwarves, my guess is they won't be back here in force. At least not right away, and
probably not at all. Both Lief and Holli agree. They think the dwarves are going to set
their sights on Burbon. Besides that, the algors will be sending the sand giants, and I
probably won't be able to stop Petiole from dropping the seeds. Dunop and the dwarves
will most likely be destroyed in a few days. You can tell your mayor that."
The reader nodded, almost with a thankful nod to the heavens. "I will. It will probably
help her a good deal. It's already easing my mind."
Ryson placed a hand on the reader's shoulder. "I'm glad I could be of some help. If
you need anything from me, just send word to Burbon. I'll do whatever I can to get it to
you. I'll be back when this is over to see how you're doing."
Matthew nodded. "Thank you. I look forward to seeing you."
He watched the delver turn to leave. As he did, he saw the sheath of the sword at
Ryson's side. An image ignited. He thought of the sword and its power as he remembered
it. He blurted out a question. "Is that still the magic sword? The Sword of Decree?"
Ryson stopped and eyed the reader with a perplexed expression. "Yes, it is."
"The same sword that Dzeb told you to hand to Tun in this church basement?"
"Yes."
"Tun didn't believe the sphere should be destroyed,” Matthew noted out loud. “I
remember that clearly. He was against the release of the magic. He wanted to encase the
sphere, bury it again. He wouldn't listen to reason. You let him hold the sword and his
opinion changed. He saw the truth behind the sphere, he saw what he needed to do."
Ryson understood in an instant. "You think it would work on Yave?"
"If it has been blessed with such a power, I can not see why not."
"I didn't even think of that." Ryson rubbed his chin in careful consideration. "I would
have to get her to hold it, and I have no idea if it would do anything. It doesn't work on
command or anything like that."
Matthew tried to sit up. He pulled himself forward slowly as he found strength in his
own faith. He considered the events of the past two seasons. He thought of the prophecies
of Godson and how the future and their fate now seemed to be in their own hands. He
remembered the scene on Sanctum Mountain where the delver found the power to
destroy Ingar. He believed that that was a blessing of Godson. He spoke of the present
with the same conviction. "If you were meant to stop this war, it will work. You have to
have faith in that. You intended to enter Dunop with Dzeb. You must still go. I don't envy
you. I don't even know what your chances might be. I guess you have to ask yourself if
you really believe it's your responsibility to stop this."
Ryson waved aside any concern over his own safety and focused on an immediate
question. "But how do I get to Yave to hold the sword?"
"How did you intend to enter the city without them killing you on sight even if you
were with Dzeb?"
"I figured I'd be worth more as a prisoner, they'd want to question me."
"If they question you, you can challenge them to hold the sword. Again, I go back to
the basic question. Do you believe you still must try to stop this?"
Ryson did no pause in his reply. "I saw those shadow trees, saw them up close," he
said holding back a shiver. "I saw what they could do at Sanctum's bottom. I heard about
how they destroyed a dwarf city the first time they were used. If there's something I can
do which might actually stop this, then yes, I have to give it a try."
"Then you have your answer. It seems your destiny with Godson's will is not quite
over."
Ryson considered what he went through at Sanctum Mountain. He now thought of
facing an army of dwarves and their vengeful queen. His shoulders drooped with the
burden. "Why does it have to come to this? I don't want to be a hero. I don't want to be
blessed or anything like that."
Matthew simply raised an eyebrow. "I think that's what they might mean when they
say a blessing may also be a curse."

Ryson took little time in leaving Connel and racing directly to the site of the elf camp
in Dark Spruce. He bypassed Burbon completely, even as the thought of his home
gnawed at him. He wanted to know what was happening there, wanted to know if the
dwarves had attacked again. He realized quickly, however, that such knowledge would
not help him. He needed to get to Dunop. That was now the simple crux of his plan.
Attempting to learn the fate of his new home was now nothing more than a distraction.
Like lightning cutting across a wide open sky, he bolted across the farmlands that
divided Connel from Dark Spruce. He raced through the thick forest and towards the
heart of the elf camp. He slowed only for an instant, only to be recognized by the
perimeter of elf guards which stood as the last line of defense. He did not wait for their
invitation, though; he simply called out his name and exploded back to full speed.
The guards may not have appreciated the delver's boldness, but they did nothing to
hinder him. They only stopped to wonder if they even could. The delver was a blur of
motion. Could they mark him with an arrow, could they even target him? It was unlikely.
Beyond this momentary diversion, they cast their attention back to the brush beyond their
camp, or to the ground beneath them.
Ryson darted through the camp. Twisting and turning, covering the breadth of the
camp, his head spun about searching for signs of Petiole or Lief. He found Lief first,
alone and muttering to himself.
Ryson drew to a halt near the grumbling elf.
"I'm back," the delver greeted.
Lief looked upon the delver with obvious surprise and much dismay. "I heard you call
in. Where's the cliff behemoth?"
"He would not come," Ryson responded plainly.
Lief blinked, as if not wanting to accept this answer.
Ryson actually felt the exasperation. "I'm sorry. I tried."
The elf only cursed. "Fire upon all of this. Why not?"
"He needed a sign."
"A sign?"
"Something from Godson," Ryson stated, seemingly with only slight annoyance. He
continued as if Dzeb's decision was now immaterial. "He wanted his doubts washed
away, or something like that. He didn't believe he should interfere. He kept talking about
everything being Godson's will, one way or the other. I don't know. It's hard to argue with
a cliff behemoth. They use their faith as a reason. How do you fight that? Anyway, he's
not coming."
"That's not what I needed to hear," Lief posed. He rubbed his forehead as his eyes
bore into the ground.
Seeing such agitation, Ryson turned to other matters, his own questions over equally
important events. "What's been happening here? Did you talk to Petiole?"
"Yes," Lief replied with a heavy weariness as he lifted his head and now looked to the
sky. His face revealed a sense of desperation as if he was asking the heavens why he was
so damned. He spoke with a tone near resentment. "I convinced Petiole to hold off using
the seeds. He gave us five days. He agreed based on my insistence that you would bring a
cliff behemoth to stop this war. This will not go over well."
Ryson was apologetic. "I tried. I just couldn't convince him."
Again, Lief shook his head. "I do not blame you. I'm just tired of this."
Ryson tried to sound hopeful. "I have a new plan."
The statement did little to soften the elf. "It was hard to believe in your first plan."
Ryson kicked at the ground. He struggled with how to explain his intentions. He
realized there was no way to make his idea sound sane, let alone reasonable. He unveiled
it bluntly. "I'm still going into Dunop. I'm just going in without Dzeb. I'm going to give
my sword to Yave. I hope it will show her how Tun really died, how it wasn't the fault of
the algors."
Lief simply stared at the delver. He said nothing, his expression revealed nothing.
Ryson spoke faster. "I know it sounds like suicide, but it is a chance. I don't
understand this sword. Your people made it, used their own magic to enchant it. It's
shown the power to reveal the way things are. It's worked before. It showed me how to
defeat Ingar. It also helped convince Tun to help us destroy his sphere. If it can do that, I
think it can help convince Yave to stop before she does more damage. If she realizes that
Tun's death was an accident, she'll stop these attacks. She can make amends with the
algors. We might still get out of this."
Lief still said nothing.
Ryson heaved a heavy sigh. "You think it's a ridiculous idea. I knew you would. It's
just ..."
Lief did not let him continue. "It may work."
Ryson's eyes widened. "You think so?"
"It is as you said, the sword has helped us before. If it had the power to break through
Tun's stubbornness, perhaps it can break Yave's madness. It is as good a plan as bringing
Dzeb to her."
Ryson smiled. "I thought so, too. Actually, it was Matthew's idea. After Dzeb turned
me down, I went to Connel. I didn't have any other ideas. I thought Matthew might come
with me. I was hoping we could all be together again… you, Holli, Matthew, and me. We
might be able to at least stop Petiole from using the seeds. Unfortunately, the dwarves
had attacked Connel. He was hurt."
Lief revealed genuine concern elves normally don't show toward humans. "Not badly I
hope?"
"I'm afraid very badly, but he's sure he'll survive and so am I."
"At least that is something. What of the attack? The city fared poorly?"
"Very. The dwarves did damage beyond what I could explain. The city's basically in
ruins. If anyone from Burbon thought Connel might lend help, they can forget it now. It'll
take a long time for Connel to recover from this. They barely have the resources to help
themselves, let alone someone else."
News of Matthew's injury and the damage to Connel did little to lift Lief's spirits. His
mood decayed as he reflected upon the heart of the problem. "Who would have thought it
would have led to this? Yave and her separatist followers. The damn fools. It is so
senseless. To attack a city, to wreak such havoc, all out of revenge. What will satisfy
her?"
"I don't know, but it's even more reason why I have to try and stop her. If the dwarves
attack Burbon like they attacked Connel, no one will survive."
Lief straightened at Ryson's lack of faith in Burbon's protectors. "Do not give up so
easily on what others can do. Give the credit that is due to your captain and to Holli,"
Lief admonished.
Ryson took hold of Lief's conviction as a sign of hope for Burbon's well-being. "Have
you heard anything? I didn't stop on the way here. I didn't think I wanted to know."
"We have scouts keeping an eye on Burbon from the trees. We need to know the
dwarves strength. As of yet, there have been no further attacks."
Ryson's eyes lit up. It seemed as if a block of weight fell free from his shoulders.
"Then everyone's safe?"
"For now, but we must make yet another critical decision. Do you really wish to enter
Dunop? I agree the Sword of Decree may hold the way out of this war, but it is not
without risk. I know you are adverse to the shadow trees, but the option still remains.
Petiole will gladly drop them now. Any threat to you or Burbon would vanish nearly
instantly. You must also consider another point. If you fail, if Yave does not grasp the
sword and continues her plans of war, the seeds will be released anyway. If you are
captured, you will face the same fate as the dwarves. Are you willing to take this risk?"
Ryson heaved a heavy breath. "I don't see as if I have a choice."
Lief frowned. "Do not be so dramatic, delver. There is a choice, and it's yours to
make."
"I'm sorry. You're right. I do have a choice. I have to try to stop this. That's what I
meant to say."
"I understand and I agree with you. I will accompany you to Dunop."
Lief waited. He eyed Ryson with defiance.
The delver responded with a surprise.
"I'm very happy to hear that. I don't want to go alone. I'm sure you expected me to
decline, but I won't. I'm glad you want to come with me."
"You will not argue the point?"
"No. I don't know where the entrance to Dunop is. I have no experience with dwarf
cities. There is no advantage to me going alone. And I'll be glad to have the company"
"I'm glad you admit to this."
He was about to say more, but Lief cut himself short. Again, time was running short.
He exhaled heavily as he cast a glance about the camp. He put a hand to his chin as he
considered the next step, a burdensome one.
The elf's consternation was not lost upon the perceptive delver. "What's wrong?"
"We might face a more difficult problem than the dwarves right now. You remember I
said Petiole gave us five days? That was on the condition you would bring a cliff
behemoth to speak to the dwarves. I have no idea what he'll say about this new plan. He
might reverse his decision."
"We have to convince him not to," Ryson cited
"We can try." There was more than a hint of pessimism in the elf's tone. "Follow me."
The delver obeyed. He moved alongside the elf. As they moved further away from the
heart of the camp, he spotted Petiole standing alone at the outskirts of the camp.
"Why is he out here?" Ryson quipped.
"He is afraid," Lief said with near shame. "He wishes to be as close to the perimeter of
guards as possible."
"What's he afraid of? The dwarves?"
"Me," Lief said succinctly
The reply was blunt and Ryson, though questions burned his mind, did not press for
details. He knew there was truth to Lief's words as he saw Petiole's reaction upon their
approach. The elder fidgeted, stepped back slightly and finally motioned for a guard. Two
elves swung down from the trees above him and took defensive positions by his side.
The sequence amazed the delver. The guards treated Lief as a genuine threat. They
drew long daggers as they took two small steps forward. They left an opening between
them, a space for Lief to see the face of the elder, but they made it clear he was not to
pass beyond them. There would be a buffer and they would close off the path if Lief tried
to move beyond it.
"Childish," Lief grumbled. He said nothing more until he stood before the camp elder.
"The delver has returned."
Petiole spoke with resentment, toward both the delver and Lief. "I see that. Where is
the cliff behemoth?"
Lief answered for Ryson. "He declined to come."
Petiole jumped upon the response. "So we have waited for nothing?! You threaten me,
you force your decision on me because you are 'the great Lief Woodson' and now you
come to me with this? If we had been attacked, the blood of any elf would have been on
your hands. The delay was uncalled for. Your delver friend returned with nothing. This
will not be forgotten. I will move to have you expelled from this camp."
Lief ignored the threat. "The absence of the cliff behemoth does not end the delver's
plan. He still intends on entering Dunop and stopping this war."
The statement stunned Petiole.
"Without the cliff behemoth?"
"Yes. He still believes there is a chance to end this before it goes any further. He will
enter Dunop, so we still must wait before dropping the seeds."
"You still want me to wait? You have no cliff behemoth and you still want me to
wait?"
"You gave us five days," Lief answered simply.
"Five days to bring a cliff behemoth before me, not five days for nonsense. What can
this delver do to stop this war? The cliff behemoth had a chance, he does not."
Lief did not back down. "You said you would withhold from using the seeds for five
days to allow Ryson the chance to stop this war. He still intends to do so."
"How?" Petiole demanded.
"The sword," Lief answered just as bluntly, but his tone carried a challenge.
Petiole appeared to weaken at the response. He bit down on his bottom lip with
uncertainty.
Ryson watched with growing interest as Lief played upon the elder's display of
weakness.
Lief growled with authority. "The sword, a prized possession of this camp for untold
cycles, which was given to this delver by Mappel. It was done because the sword
revealed new powers in his hands. Are you going to deny the existence of those powers?"
Petiole slumped. It was difficult enough for him to argue with Lief, but to cast doubt
upon the memory of Mappel was beyond his abilities. It was Mappel's shoes he could not
fill. It was Mappel's reputation he could not meet on his own terms. He was always cast
in the past elder's shadow. He was always compared to the memory of the fallen leader,
and always unfavorably. Mappel's decision to give the enchanted sword over to the
delver was never debated. It was also well known that in the delver's hands the sword
destroyed the sphere and saved the elves. Surely, the camp would scorn him if he
questioned the power of the sword. They would turn against him, question him like they
always did.
The current elder mouthed puny resistance. "Yave is far removed from the sword. It is
here and she remains in the cave castle of Dunop."
"That is why the delver still plans to enter the dwarf city."
"So what does the delver intend to do?"
"He will allow Yave to hold the sword. It will break the hold of her madness."
Petiole seized quickly upon a weakness. He saw a way to attack the logic of the plan
while not attacking the enchantment of the sword. He spoke with renewed vigor. Again,
the resentment and sarcasm dripped from his every word. "And how will he accomplish
that? Simply walk into the throne room of Dunop and command her to hold the sword?"
Ryson jumped into the fray for the first time. He was growing tired of Petiole's
resistance. He was not looking forward to entering Dunop, but he had made the choice.
Better to get it over with as quickly as possible then to stand here and argue.
"Not simple and not command," the delver said. "I do intend to walk into Dunop, but I
will surrender myself as the delver that was with Tun at his death. Yave will demand to
see me. You can't doubt that. She probably blames me as much as the algors. She must
also know the sword I carry played a great role in our deeds at Sanctum. I will offer it to
her as a sign of my own grief. She'll either accept it as such or take it as a trophy of her
victory over me. Either way, I truly believe she will take hold of the handle. That is all I
can hope for. I can't control the rest."
"And who does?" Petiole attempted to fight the idea.
Ryson answered flatly, not hesitating to reveal his uncertainty. "Fate, maybe. Destiny,
maybe even Godson. Who can tell? I don't know when or even how the sword will work.
It either will or it won't. If it does, she'll see the truth. She will see how Tun died and
know that it wasn't anyone's fault."
"And that is it?" Petiole pressed.
Lief eyed the elder with growing hostility. "And what more do you want?"
The elf guards appeared to tense.
Petiole brooded. Finally, he lit upon an acceptable solution to his own fears. "I want
assurances from you. I want you to take responsibility for everything that happens from
this point on. If the delver fails, I want you to admit it as your failure. I want you to leave
this camp and never return. And if you are banished, I want you to admit I was always
correct, state that the shadow trees were our only true choice."
Lief glared with burning thoughts. Puny leader, puny elf. He spit out his response like
a bitter taste. "On the first, you will have more than my word. It will be clear that I back
this course of action for I am accompanying Ryson to Dunop. No one will question that I
demanded the delay of the shadow trees. And if we fail, you will not have to demand my
exile. If we can not stop the dwarves, I will not be returning. As to the last, defending the
use of the shadow trees will be your concern, not mine."
"You will go with the delver into the caves?" Petiole asked with more than a hint of
hopefulness.
"I will remain with him unless the dwarves choose to separate us," Lief replied firmly.
"But you will put your fate in the hands of Yave and the dwarves?"
Lief did not hesitate in insulting the elder, something he would never have considered
with Mappel. "I put my fate in things obviously beyond your reckoning. I will not,
however, run from the dwarves. I will enter Dunop. I am sure they will take me prisoner
along with Ryson. They will not let me go unless Ryson succeeds. That should be enough
for you."
Petiole sneered, but said nothing. He grumbled then nodded his acceptance.
Lief wished to leave the elder immediately. He took one last look at the guards before
he left. They returned his glance with suspicion. "Fire upon you fools." He swung his
shoulders about and marched back toward the center of camp.
Near a small tent made of pine branches, Lief made his final preparations. He
removed his thin, double-edged sword from his belt, and the bow and quiver from his
shoulder. He looked to the delver to give his explanation.
"If we are surrendering to the dwarves we should go unarmed, except for your sword
of course."
The delver agreed. His hand went to his pouch searching for his dagger. As his fingers
came up empty, he recalled the algor burial where he had left his knife in the sand. "I
don't have my knife anymore. I'm going to have to replace it when I get back to Burbon."
Lief smiled. "Optimism. I like it."
Ryson chuckled at the thought. "I guess so. Well, do you know where the entrance to
the dwarf city is?"
"It is not far. We can reach it well before dark. You realize we will meet resistance
immediately. The entrance was the point of meeting between elf and dwarf when we
traded goods. They will not leave the passage unguarded."
"I didn't think they would."
With no other preparations, the two left the elf camp. The elf took to the trees and the
delver followed at ground level. As Lief jumped from branch to branch, Ryson rambled
across the ground, twisting and turning like a fleeing rabbit. He did not wish to be caught
by any enemy until he reached the cave-city entrance. Lief called out directions from
above and the two crossed the necessary distance without incident.
Close to the entrance, Ryson called out a warning of his own. "I've caught a scent. I
think it's dwarf."
"Probably," Lief replied. "The entrance should be within your sight. Look to the
northwest, through that clump of willows. Do you see the thick brush?"
Ryson spied it in a heartbeat. "Yes. That's it? It's not in a hill side?"
"No. There are not many hills this deep in the forest. The entrance is a small vertical
drop into a tunnel. The tunnel declines at a fairly steep grade with few turns."
"Do you think there are dwarves outside?"
"Probably a scout hidden in the brush. That's probably the scent you have seized. He is
probably back down the tunnel by now, warning others. There won't be any others
outside. It would not be wise, especially if they are worried about a counter attack from
elves. They would be targets for archers."
Ryson tore off in a blur of motion. At top speed, he circled the clump of brush. His
eyes scanned nearly every inch of the forest surrounding the mound. The area was clear.
He stopped several body lengths from the brush. He could detect the outline of the hole
which led to the access way. He waited for Lief to drop from the trees to join him before
he moved closer.
As the elf hit the ground, he showed signs of tension. He looked at the hole with
apprehension.
Ryson sensed it. "Anything wrong? I didn't see anyone around."
"It's the tunnel. I do not like being bottled up in the ground."
"I didn't think of that. Do you want to stay here?"
Lief was resolute. "By now, the dwarves know we are here together. We have to
surrender together. Otherwise, they will suspect a trick."
"What should we do? Call to them? Announce our surrender?"
"It's a start."
Lief called out their intentions to the silent hollow. He then turned to Ryson. "There is
little else for us to do now but move forward."
Ryson did not wait for an objection and immediately took the lead. He jumped
through the hole before Lief could protest and simply waited for the elf to follow.
As he stood within the tunnel, Ryson marveled at its intricacies. Sparkling beams of
light bounced off the walls and cascaded down the descending path. Light gems
imbedded in the walls and floor reflected the sun beams with perfect precision. The air
was strangely dry, almost devoid of the moisture Ryson expected in the cave. It was also
surprisingly fresh, a by-product of the dryness. With no mold or mildew, there was little
to spoil the air. The tunnels very construction also amazed the delver. It used no lumber
for support. Instead, the very rock and dirt was compacted into a smoothed, solid exterior
as if they walked within smoothened pipes. The path was amazingly wide and there was
plenty of head room for the delver. He could stand without difficulty, and even extend his
arms well above his head. He would have to jump slightly to actually touch the tunnel
ceiling. It brought a question to his mind as Lief joined him in the access way.
"I was expecting a tighter fit. Why did the dwarves make this tunnel so large when
they're so short?"
"This tunnel was used to transport timber obtained from us to the city below. The
dwarves would also bring up stone they would trade to us in return. To allow the passage
of such large material, the path needed to be wide."
A faint smell of smoke drifted up from deep down the tunnel and caught Ryson's
attention. "I smell smoke."
"The dwarves burn small fires for light as well as using the light gems. These tunnels
serve many purposes including air flow."
The elf was not allowed to continue. Portions of rock slid away. Hidden compartments
and tunnel offshoots were revealed immediately as a dozen dwarves collapsed upon the
elf and delver. They stood with malice as Lief and Ryson froze. One finally barked a
command.
"Unfasten your belt and drop the sword," a female warrior growled.
Ryson did not move his hand.
"Are you deaf, human?"
"I'm not human. I'm delver. My name is Ryson Acumen."
Near bedlam. Some dwarves advanced, some lowered their weapons. All shouted.
Ryson stared down the female warrior that seemed to be in command, tenuous as it
might have been. He dared her to attack. "You seem to know of my name. Then you must
also know I was with Tun and Jon Folarok at Sanctum. I am here to surrender to your
queen."
"Do not touch him!" the commander hissed to the other dwarves.
Ryson responded with even greater authority. "I wouldn't touch my friend, either. The
elf is unarmed. He is Lief Woodson. We were both at Sanctum. We both witnessed Tun
Folarok's death."
A call came from the dwarf pack. "Lies."
Ryson kept his gaze locked upon the warrior. "The sword is proof. How much do you
know of what happened in Sanctum?"
"Enough," the female snarled in reply.
"Then you know of the sword's enchantment. I'm going to unsheathe it now to show
you. Then it goes back to my belt. Nothing more."
Ryson did not wait for the warrior's approval. Slowly but deftly, his right hand
grasped the hilt of his sword. The blade glided free from its sheath. The light within the
cave doubled and redoubled. There was no denying the source. The blade glowed like
fire. Ryson held it aloft for but a moment. With delver quickness, he returned it to its
scabbard. He stood empty handed, the sword at his belt, waiting for the dwarf reply.
"I will take the sword," the warrior claimed.
"It is not for you," Ryson replied with a slight laugh.
"You scorn me?"
"You're not taking this sword from me."
Lief watched silently. He was a secondary player in this scene. Though the dwarves
kept a suspicious eye upon him, their attention bounded over the delver.
"You will stop me?"
"If I have to. I'm surrendering, but not to you. I'm surrendering to Yave."
"Yave is not here."
The note of contempt was not lost upon the delver. "So one of the separatist followers
has no love for the queen? You would care little about her wishes?"
The warrior shot back quickly. "You think I should just let you pass with a sword at
your side? Disarm. Now!
"No."
The dwarf's eyes widened. "This is not a debate."
"I know, but you don't seem to realize that."
The group of dwarves growled with contempt. They shouted out their own desires
with rabid fury.
"Kill him now."
"Take the sword from him."
"Let me."
The female waved her hand at the others. "Be quiet."
Ryson summed up the situation quickly. "I know you can take the sword by force.
You can kill me now, but that's not the issue, unless of course you want to displease the
queen. I'm here to surrender to Yave. Don't you think she'll want to hear that from me?
There are enough dwarves here to relay this news to her. Word will reach her that Ryson
Acumen and Lief Woodson were at her door. She'll want to know why they weren't
brought before her. She'll demand to know. What will you tell her?"
The dwarf woman hesitated. She looked about the collection of scouts, guards, and
warriors. Some would keep their mouths shut. They were loyal to the separatists, not the
queen, but not all of them. A few might speak of this incident. If so, she would be
punished if she did not bring the delver to Yave. She succumbed, but not without
assuming some authority. "I will bring you before the queen. You will follow my
instructions, or I will kill you. Understand?"
"Understood," Ryson mouthed with little respect.
The dwarf turned her back on the delver, a senseless display of disregard for the
delver and the elf. She quickly issued commands as to those who would accompany her.
She chose only two others, another display of disrespect. She commanded the remaining
dwarves to stay at the entrance and watch for an elf assault.
Ryson and Lief followed the stodgy warrior down the tunnel and deeper into the
ground. Ryson attempted to gauge their descent. He wondered how far down they would
travel before they saw the first signs of the underground city. The thought filled him with
anticipation. This was his first excursion into dwarf living space. He could only imagine
what he might find.
Lief, however, found no appreciation in their journey.
"I hate tunnels," he mumbled.
"Quiet!" the dwarf ordered.
Lief grunted.
Ryson noted more and more branches of the smaller corridors as they progressed
down the main tunnel. He wanted to ask their purpose, but he knew the dwarf would not
respond. He looked at signs upon the ground. He saw only a few faint tracks, as only the
rock dust and loose dirt would allow for an imprint, but he noticed a level of wear. Some
tunnels were obviously used more often than others. He also began to notice grooves and
hollows penetrating the rock. It could have been caused by water erosion, but the lack of
moisture removed that possibility. Ryson speculated that the use of heavy carts filled with
gems and stone might have created the ridges. Stone wheels would easily grind away at
the tunnel floor. Ryson could only wonder as to the frequency of repairs to these tunnels.
Further down the main passage, Ryson began to notice the scent of smoke growing
stronger. Also, the growing light in front of them began to rival the light from behind.
"More light gems from other tunnels and air holes converging at one center," he
speculated out loud.
"Quiet," the dwarf reminded him. This time, however, she attempted to accentuate her
command. She did not turn, but she intuitively knew the distance Ryson walked behind
her. She thrust the butt-end of her axe handle backwards, intending to strike the delver in
the mid-section. Ryson saw her muscles tense just before she struck. He side stepped the
blow with ease. The blunt handle bottom hit nothing but air. The warrior almost lost her
gripped, and certainly lost her composure. She twirled around with hot rage.
"Do you wish to attempt escape?"
"I wish to avoid being struck by your axe handle," Ryson responded sternly.
The warrior hissed with fury. "I will ask the queen that I have the honor of executing
you."
Ryson wanted to respond with sarcasm, but he held his tongue. He simply looked
away and waited for the dwarf to lead them again.
In but a few more steps, he noticed two large blocks of stone waiting like sentries at
opposite sides of the tunnel. Their mass seemed to defy movement, but they hung from
stone hinges as thick as Ryson's chest. Once pushed together, they would form a near
impenetrable barrier. Another contingent of dwarves waited here. They eyed the party
with distrust.
As the woman warrior explained the situation, Ryson looked beyond the check point
and down the final length of the passage. The path widened only slightly from side to
side, but the ceiling sloped upward and out of his sight. The passage no longer appeared
as a tunnel, but as an alley way. Instead of curved walls, the sides became blocked
structures with doors and windows. The ground flattened out into a well-trodden street
made of cobblestone. A small lamp post, apparently molded out of iron, stood with a
small flickering light. As he considered the simple lamp post, he drank in the familiarity
of these surroundings. It looked almost like a side street in Burbon, but instead of wooden
buildings, everything was carved into or out of stone.
Ryson arched his neck to see further down the underground street. He saw small
pockets of activity. The attention of other dwarves drew towards his position. This he did
not like. The grumblings of these dwarves attracted others. The number of those fixated
on him grew with every blink of the eye. They were not happy and he did not relish the
thought of marching by them.
He looked back to the guards. They appeared unfazed by the growing mob. Were they
certain the crowd would not take their prisoners? Or did they simply not care? Ryson
wanted to hasten them, but he held his tongue. He knew if he spoke, they would only
linger that much longer. He swallowed his apprehension as he looked to Lief to gauge the
elf's worries.
Lief appeared more concerned with the rock that surrounded him than with the
growing number of dwarves. He looked up at the ceiling constantly as if he were afraid of
its imminent collapse. Ryson wondered how long the elf could last down here before the
claustrophobia took its toll. His thoughts were interrupted by a command of the female
warrior.
"Wake up and move!"
He saw a desire to strike him in her eyes, but also hesitancy. She remembered her past
failure and apparently did not want to appear foolish in front of the gatekeepers.
Ryson stepped forward and followed the warrior. Uneasiness gripped him as they
headed directly toward the crowd. Thankfully, as he drew closer, he realized their faces
were filled more with curiosity than hate. They did not intend to lash out or take him and
Lief by force. He wondered how many of them knew what was truly happening.
As his eyes perused the onlookers, he drank in a wealth of new images for his delver
mind. He saw the makeup of simple dwarf people. These were not warriors, not guards,
and not royalty. They lived in this underground city like the human civilians lived in
Burbon. He imagined the tasks they performed by their clothes and by what they carried.
He saw them as rock cutters, jewelers, builders, and miners. As he looked upon dwarf
children for the first time in his life, he saw them as families; husbands and wives, sons
and daughters.
In this instant, he knew that what he was doing was right. These people were not
responsible for the attacks on the algors and the elves. They did not commit the killing in
Burbon or Connel. And they did not deserve to face the shadow trees. He walked on
through Dunop with renewed confidence, believing it was not foolishness that brought
him here.
Rather than worry over his own well-being, he now allowed himself the opportunity to
gaze at the wonders of this underground city, a masterpiece of design and construction.
Tunnels became streets and alleys, caverns became squares and plazas. Boulders the size
of hills were hollowed out for merchant shops and homes. More than once he crossed a
stone or iron bridge which spanned an underground river. To his surprise, he saw fish.
This revelation caused him to look for more of the unusual. Vegetation grew, both in
the river and in the soil. It seemed impossible. They were far underground. He looked up,
but there was no sky, only rock. There was no sun, but there was light, and that held the
answer.
The light gems and mirrors brought sunlight through the air holes and tunnels. Every
carving of rock reflected the light. To the dwarves, it was viewed as the one resource
which could not be wasted. Sun beams glistened through every passage. They sparkled
off jewels and polished rock. Dim as it was, it brought life to this underground city. It
was not overwhelming, certainly not like noon time upon the surface, more like just
before twilight. This allowed for the growth of algae in the rivers and sparse plants along
the roadsides.
His observations sparked his delver instincts. As he walked behind the dwarf escort,
his spirit pulled at him to investigate more of this city. It urged him to take off down one
of the mysterious corridors or to the center of a large cavern. He wished to inspect the
interiors of the shops and homes or to follow the run of the river. He bubbled with
enthusiasm like a child in an amusement park. This was not just a cave; this was a place
of magic, not the kind which allowed spells and enchantments, but the magic of
something new and nearly inconceivable.
Thoughts of exploration, however, quickly slipped away as the appearance of heavily
armed dwarfs became more common. As they proceeded, they passed more check points.
The reason soon became obvious. Dunop's Royal Palace appeared at the center of the city
in a large expanse of a cavern.
The structure emanated more strength than beauty. It overwhelmed the space with a
sense of power that typified the dwarf race. The palace appeared part of the cave, as if
stalagmites and stalactites grew together over untold cycles to form this dominant
structure. The obvious brilliance in design, however, quickly removed any thought that
this might be a simple haphazard coincidence. The rock was sculpted with perfect
precision. From the steps of the front entrance to the highest ramparts, the very lines of
construction defied weakness.
Immediately, upon his very first glance, Ryson could sense the intentions of the
architects. From the start, before the first rock was placed at its foundation, the palace
was viewed as a whole. Each rock, each piece of granite was to be molded together until
this palace was born into a single entity. The edifice would boast of strength.
Vulnerability would not be permitted.
The delver wished to stop, to gaze at the stark power and drink in the image.
Strangely, the dwarf escort allowed him to pause.
The warrior slowly turned. She wore a grin, but it held pride to the degree of venom.
Her pasty white, rugged flesh wrinkled about the curl of her lip.
"View the last place you will ever see, delver. Know the true power of my race. Know
that there is nothing we can't do."
The delver ignored her. Lief did not.
"Climb a tree," the elf said sarcastically.
Rage took the place of pride in the dwarf. She moved upon Lief. Two dwarf guards in
the rear fumbled with uncertainty.
The elf straightened with defiance. His own eyes blazed with equal fury. He held no
weapon, but he would not cower before this separatist. Only the delver's speed prevented
his murder.
Ryson stepped between them. He did not touch the dwarf or draw his own weapon. He
simply blocked her path, kept her from getting within arm's reach of the elf.
The dwarf growled. Her eyes remained fixed past the delver and upon the elf. She
tried to sidestep Ryson. She could no sooner outrun the wind. Her frustration billowed.
She reared back with her axe, determined to cut her way to the elf, if necessary.
"Enough!"
The warrior froze as every other dwarf guard came to immediate attention at the
arrival of another dwarf, a dwarf whose command was exceeded only by that of Yave
herself. The War Com stepped down the palace steps toward the party. He mumbled an
order to the warrior. She did not attempt to question, but she offered a glare toward Lief
as she stepped away. Strog eyed the two uninvited guests with mistrust. He said nothing.
He simply stood in front of them and stared.
Ryson was not in the mood for another contest of wills. He knew what Strog intended,
stand there rigid until one gave up and spoke first. He decided to voice his intentions
without delay. He wasn't giving in to the War Com, he just didn't intend on playing this
ridiculous game.
"I didn't come here to stand around and see who blinks first. I've already surrendered
myself. I'm sure the queen will want to know this."
The War Com did not respond. He continued to stare silently as if he would play the
game regardless.
The confrontation had gained the attention of many dwarves. Many stood watching
from a distance. Ryson spoke up, loud enough for all of them to hear. "My name is Ryson
Acumen. I was with Jon and Tun in Sanctum."
Strog closed his eyes, trying to block out the reaction. He couldn't. He heard the
murmurs of the crowd. Word of this would spread quickly.
"Follow me," he said with disgust. He turned to move, but stopped suddenly. He
placed his fury on the warrior escort. "Why does he still wear his sword? Why was he not
disarmed?"
"He wouldn't allow it."
"He wouldn't allow it?" Strog cut her off. "Since when do prisoners dictate to us?"
Ryson interrupted. Again, he spoke loud enough for all around to hear. "The sword is
not for you or anyone else. Only the queen. It was named the Sword of Decree by the
elves that forged it. It is the sword that convinced Tun to help destroy the sphere. Don't
you think you should bring us, and it, to her now?"
Strog folded his hands together. His first response was to dismiss the female warrior.
He would not even let her voice her request to have the honor of executing the delver. He
ordered the other escorts to return to the tunnels and motioned for palace guards to join
him. Finally, he turned to Ryson.
"I will take you to the queen. Not because you request it, because I desire it. If you
attempt to draw your sword, I will have you killed on the spot."
Strog did not wait for a response. He swirled back to the palace entrance and marched
up the polished steps.
Ryson and Lief were soon surrounded by a cluster of dwarf warriors. They were urged
forward down long corridors and placed first in a tiny room devoid of all furnishings. The
queen would have to be summoned. She was not simply available for every prisoner that
was marched through the palace.
After a brief wait, they were again ushered into the corridors, and finally brought into
the throne room and put before the queen. Ryson saw the mix of emotions captured in her
face and eyes. Cold hate. Blazing hot fury. He sensed the conflict within her. She wanted
to lash out. She wanted to make them cower in her icy stare. And if she favored either the
elf or the delver with her distaste, it was Ryson.
The delver treated her malice with equal measures of respect and indifference. He
would not ignore her ire completely, would not speak with reverence as if greeting a
friend, but he would not bend from his purpose. He knew she blamed him for the death of
her son. The memory of Tun cast a shadow upon his soul. He would not stand there as if
there were no loss. At the same time, he considered the losses to the algors in the
Lacobian and to the humans in Connel, all because of her madness. It was her thirst for
revenge which brought him here. It was his intention to end this dementia, an intention he
was not sure was possible. He stood before her with patience and indignation, remorse
and sympathy, uncertainty and determination.
He folded his hands before him, as if praying, and dropped his gaze to the floor. It was
not his desire to lock upon a battle of wills with Yave. He would not invite further
hostility. He waited to be recognized.
Lief, as with every other dwarf in the room other than Yave, swung his attention back
and forth between the delver and the queen. The crux of this moment was pinpointed.
There was little he could do. These two would now decide the fate of the dwarves in
Dunop, the elves in Dark Spruce, and the humans in Burbon. The die was cast. He could
only wait, and watch the result.
Yave cleared her throat. "You are the delver that brought my son to Sanctum?"
"I am," Ryson responded without looking up.
"This elf was with you?"
"He was."
"And you now surrender yourselves to me?"
"We do."
"Why?" The word ended with a rattle in her throat, as if her fury was about to spew
forth.
"We want to try and stop all of this. It's not a secret why you attacked the algors. I
don't think it's too difficult to figure out why you attacked Connel and Burbon. And the
elf camp in Dark spruce. You're trying to get those you think are responsible for Tun's
death."
"Who ARE responsible for his death," Yave corrected.
Ryson chose not to dispute her. "I was the one that helped convince Tun to go to
Sanctum. I'm sure you blame me as much as the algors."
Yave's suspicion flowed over her repugnance for the two prisoners. She revealed her
mistrust. "Is that all? No other reason? I was told you would not allow my dwarves to
take your sword. Maybe you thought as a delver you would move quick enough to
assassinate me."
"I have no such intentions."
"And I am simply to take your word for that?" Yave scoffed. "What am I supposed to
believe? That you simply surrendered because you did not want to run? You are a delver
and I am no fool. I know what you are capable of. You might elude us for seasons
without end, but you surrender anyway. You think maybe I would be moved by this act?
Did you think I might be impressed by what you might believe is courage? Or do you
really wish to sacrifice yourself?"
"I do not wish to sacrifice anything."
"But you came here to surrender to me?"
"I was hoping there might be a way we might satisfy you without need for further
violence."
"You think I will be satisfied with this?"
"I don't know."
Yave shook her head. "What is it you're trying to tell me, delver?"
"I want this all to end. That's all."
Yave spit upon the rock floor. Such behavior actually surprised the delver. He
recovered, however, before Yave's gaze locked upon him once more.
Yave's eyes narrowed. "Let me tell you what I think. I believe you are more concerned
about other things. You did not come here to simply surrender. You came here to try and
talk your way out of the justice which will be rendered upon you. You wish to try and
save those you hold dear. I will not have it. No one saved my Tun. My son is dead. Do
you have family in Connel, or in Burbon? Where?"
Ryson stiffened. He would not answer.
"I think you do. I guess I will have to see them all killed in each city. What do you
think of that delver?"
Ryson redirected the conversation. "Did you know that Tun was against destroying the
sphere?"
The question temporarily stunned Yave. "What?"
"Tun did not want to enter Sanctum," Ryson repeated. "He did not want the magic
released."
"I know that," Yave snarled. "You tricked him."
Ryson ignored her. "He wanted to seal the breach, keep the sphere buried. He held to
this for long meetings with the elf elder Mappel. He ignored the requests of the humans
as well. He was not convinced the sphere was a true threat. Do you know what changed
his mind?"
Yave's eyes narrowed even further until they became mere slits. Only the blacks of her
pupils were visible between her lids. "I heard the story. You and an infernal cliff
behemoth came to Connel, you handed him your sword and tricked him into believing
your falsehoods. You made him think that releasing the magic was good."
"No. He never wanted to release the magic, but he knew the sphere had to be
destroyed."
"That's the same thing!" Yave bellowed.
"No, it's not. He never accepted that the release of the magic would be anything but
trouble for the dwarves. He hated the idea, and he mistrusted everyone that entered
Sanctum. But he realized something else. He realized the sphere would destroy everyone.
He didn't want the magic released. He simply didn't have a choice."
"So what? What does any of this have to do with those responsible for his death? Are
you saying he had to die? Do you expect me to believe that?"
"No, I don't. I expect you to believe what you want to believe. Just like Tun. I only
brought it up to make sure you knew why Tun entered Dunop. You blame me, you blame
Lief, and you blame the algors for Tun's death. If that's true, you also have to blame the
sword that's at my side. It brought light to the core of Sanctum. It led us to the algor tier
where Tun died. If I surrender myself to you, I also have to surrender my sword. That's
why I brought it here and didn't let anyone else take it from me. It's here for you. If you
wish to destroy the algors, if you want to kill me, then you must also want to destroy the
sword. If you believe you have to have justice on all those involved at Sanctum, you
might as well take the sword as well."
Yave's eyes broke wide open. Her mouth curled to a distorted snarl. "I will take your
sword! I will kill you with it! That will be justice!"
Ryson could have stopped her. He could have deflected her hand or he could have
darted away in the bat of an eye. She moved so ploddingly it was almost humorous. He
allowed her, however, a clear path to his sword handle. As she leapt up to him, the top of
her head reaching up only to the center of his chest, he made no move. He kept his hands
folded in front of him. As her thick fingers took hold of the hilt and her short arms
struggled to pull the long sword free of its sheath, he waited without objection. Even as
the light bathed him from the blade which was now free, he made no move of defense.
He simply watched her closely, waited for the sign of enlightenment that held all of his
hopes.
With the sword firmly in her grasp and the blade free, Yave stepped away and reared
her elbow back. The point of the sword aimed right at the delver's stomach. The blade
never wavered, but it never pierced the delver. It held suspended in midair as confusion
washed over Yave. She stood like a statue staring into blank space.
"No," she whispered.
Her shoulders shivered like an autumn leaf hanging on to a branch by a thin stem. Her
left hand met her right upon the sword's hilt. She doubled over forward, still hanging
upon the sword, the blade still filling the room with light, the point still directed at the
delver.
"Tun, Tun," she spoke in agony.
She lifted her head and her eyes revealed tears. The hate slowly ebbed from her face
as her brow was knitted not in fury, but in despair. She looked upon the delver and the elf
with regret, but only for a moment.
Her grip tightened upon the sword. She whispered her son's name again. Her focus
drifted down the flaming blade. Her shoulders squared as she filled herself with her own
intent. She lifted the sword up high before pulling it to her breast. She hugged the flat of
the blade with her arm as she jammed her eyes shut.
With yet another turn of emotion, she shook with a start. She screamed in anguish as
she threw the blade to the floor. Her hands pressed against her face as if the magnified
light burned her skin.
"Cover the sword!" she cried.
A guard moved to seize it.
"Do not touch it," she commanded before his fingers could touch the weapon.
"Blanket it, but leave it where it is. No one is to touch it. Ever!"
The dwarf guard looked about with confusion. Throwing his hands up, he removed his
own cloak and thrust it over the blade. The room grew instantly darker.
Ryson looked upon Yave in a stupor. "Didn't you see? Don't you understand now?"
"Shut up!" Yave violently pulled her hands from her face, scratching her cheeks with
her own nails.
Confusion bit at the delver. "I ..."
He was not allowed to continue.
"Imprison them with Jon. They all saw to Tun's murder. Let them share the same cell."
Shock prevented the delver from reacting. He was immediately in the grasp of several
dwarf guards. The strong hands held him firm. There was no escape.

They said nothing, delver and elf, as they were escorted roughly through the corridors
of the palace prison. They did not struggle. Each felt the strength of the dwarf hands that
held them. They would have been tossed about like rag dolls had they chosen to resist,
even the delver. Ryson's gift was in his dexterity, his agility, not in strength. He could
avoid the grip of a dwarf, but not break it.
The dwarf escorts brought them before a stone door. Their grip tightened on the
captives as one saw to the opening of the cell. Both Ryson and Lief felt dwarf fingers
crushing their flesh right to the bone. The release of the pressure was welcome, until
heavy hands thrust them both into the darkness of the cave-like hold.
"I don't understand!" Ryson proclaimed to Lief once they were thrown into the dank
cell. His statement was punctuated by the heavy closing of the stone door. Rock thumped
against rock just before a single click testified to the locking of their prison. The delver
looked to the door with abhorrence. Small cracks of light pierced the edges of the door,
an accent to their predicament. "How can she still think we're responsible? How can she
just throw us in here?"
Lief appeared more concerned with the conditions of their imprisonment. He stared up
at the dark stone ceiling overhead. He pressed his hands against the thick walls which
surrounded him. He exhaled heavily as if trying to rid himself of a tightening of his chest.
A groan escaped his lips.
Concern for Lief replaced Ryson's bafflement. "Are you alright?"
"Stupid question," Lief mumbled.
Ryson agreed. "You're right. It was. What can I do for you?"
"Give me space. I just need a chance to adjust."
"Right."
Ryson backed away quickly. He did not pressure the elf with further questions.
Instead, he took the chance to examine the cell. His eyes bore through the darkness and
immediately fell upon the slumped figure residing upon a flattened piece of stone.
"Jon?"
No answer.
"I think that's Jon."
At the moment, Lief did not care.
Ryson took four bounding steps across the cell. His presence was not acknowledged
by the dwarf. Other than heavy, uncertain breathing, Jon made no movement at all. The
delver needed to bend over to get a clear look at the dethroned dwarf king.
Dirt and grime adhered to Jon's gaunt face like slime on a stagnate pool. His
expression was vacant. His arms hung from his shoulders like limp clumps of seaweed.
His hands were thin, almost bony and not at all like the powerful hands Ryson
remembered. His back remained hunched over even as Ryson placed a palm on his
shoulder. Jon showed no sign of sensing the delver's touch. There was little spark of life
to generate any reaction whatsoever. His eyes were open, but he chose not to see.
"Jon?" Ryson whispered.
Still, the dwarf did not respond.
Ryson shook him gently. The dwarf only slumped further. Any stimulus which would
bring him back to reality was unwelcome.
Ryson stood up straight, took his hand from the dwarf and placed it on his own
forehead. "I can't take much more of this."
The delver stiffened. He kicked once at the rocks by his feet before returning his hand
to the dwarf. This time he took hold of the dwarf's tattered shirt at the shoulder. There
was plenty of cloth to grip. The shirt was loose and roomy around Jon's neck as the dwarf
was now simply wasting away.
"Jon! don't you remember me? It's Ryson."
One last time, the name of the delver stirred the dwarf's memory. He lifted his head
slightly. He did not look at the figure before him. His head turned slowly from side to
side. He blinked his eyes over and over as if trying to see through a cloud of fog. He
started to slump again, welcoming the hazy mist of near unconsciousness.
Ryson fought him. He pulled at the cloth, trying to lift the dwarf off the slab, but the
shirt began to slip over Jon's head. Ryson released his grip, but threw his arms to Jon's
sides. He shook the dwarf more vigorously.
Jon resisted reality. He moved with Ryson's shake as if he were nothing more than a
pile of jelly.
"This is ridiculous." Frustration bubbled from the delver.
"He's given up," Lief spoke up. The elf had found a place in the middle of the
enclosed cavern, an area which gave him the most available space. He continued to
struggle with the growing dread of his claustrophobia, but he managed to display some
semblance of control. His hands closed into tight fists. Each breath heaved his chest with
vigor. His gaze shifted uneasily about the all-encompassing rock as if it could not be
trusted. Still, he spoke with a hardened understanding of Jon's true plight. "He does not
want to believe this is happening anymore than I do. Give me a few days down here and I
will probably look the same."
"You can't mean that. Look at him. He hasn't been locked in here that long."
"His troubles exceed the time of his imprisonment."
Ryson would not listen. He shook the dwarf harder. "Come on, Jon! It's me! Don't you
remember?"
"He probably remembers more than he wants to," Lief argued.
"So what?" Ryson nearly exploded. "He can't just give up like this."
"He has and I don't think you can blame him."
Ryson released the dwarf and walked away in near disgust. "Sure I can."
Lief admonished the delver with a harsh tone. "He has lost his brother. His father has
left him. The throne was forced upon him and then taken away by his own mother. Think
about that. Can you still blame him?"
Ryson was in no mood to look at things logically. "I don't know. I just don't think he
should sit there like a toadstool. We may need his help."
"Help for what? What is there left for us to do? You don't really think we have any
options available to us, do you?"
The question struck at Ryson like a hammer. He looked at Lief, he looked at Jon, and
he looked upon the tons of rock that surrounded him.
"We can't get out of here, can we?"
"Not likely."
Ryson would not accept that answer. He shook his head with vehemence. "There has
to be some chance of escape. They have to open the door at some time to feed us."
Lief almost laughed. "They do? Why? Are we honored guests?"
"They can't just leave us here to starve."
"Of course they can."
Ryson stared in disbelief at the stone door. "No one can be that evil."
Lief breathed with a sardonic laugh. "She's mad, insane. There's no telling what she
might do, but I seriously doubt we will ever see the surface again. Look at Jon. When do
you think he has had his last meal?"
"Maybe they'll come to question us."
"About what?" Lief posed.
"I don't know. Godson, Lief, help me out here. There's got to be something else we
can do."
"Unless you know of a way to break through rock, there is nothing we can do."
Ryson's eyes flared. "Stop it. Don't you know what you're saying? If we've failed, the
dwarves will attack Burbon, and probably Connel again as well. You heard her. She
wants to go after my family. She won't stop until everyone in Burbon and Connel is
dead."
Ryson stepped closer to Lief. He didn't care about the elf's desire for space. The
thought of Linda in danger fueled the fire of his spirit. "We can't let that happen. I don't
care what we have to do."
"Do not be so certain of Burbon's destruction," Lief attempted to assuage the delver.
"It is preparing for the attack. They have a chance at survival."
The thought did little to comfort the delver. Ryson focused on his own desire to help
instead. "We don't give up, not as long as Yave wants to continue this. Do you hear me?"
"I hear you, but I have not heard your solution to our current predicament. I would
welcome any suggestion to be free of this prison."
Ryson caught his anger. He did not apologize for his outburst, but he turned away
from the elf. "They're going to open that door. When they do, I'm going to be past them
so fast they won't know what to think."
"I hope they do open the door," Lief agreed.
"This doesn't make any sense," Ryson continued to argue. "Why didn't the sword
work? It did something. You saw her face, didn't you?"
"I did."
"When she held it, something was revealed to her. Why didn't she see the truth?"
"Maybe she did."
"Huh?"
Lief did not hesitate in explaining. He had been considering this ever since they were
taken from the throne room. He offered his own conclusions as he constantly grappled
with the enclosed space. At times his voice labored and his attention drifted to the
encircling stone, but he maintained enough composure to offer the only plausible
solution.
"I don't think anyone would deny that the sword did something in Yave's hands, but
the enchantment of the sword is new and unknown. In your possession, it somehow
gained the power to bestow knowledge to the holder. You once said it saved you from a
vampire. When you gripped the handle, you simply knew how to deal with the monster."
"That's the truth," Ryson admitted.
"I do not deny it. I also know that Tun understood the true danger of the sphere after
holding the sword. He no longer argued over our course of action. He agreed to journey
to Sanctum, reveal the dwarf secret, and help destroy the sphere. He did so even though
he knew the magic would be free again. The sword told him what must be done."
The delver continued to agonize over the sword's apparent failure. "I know that, too.
So why didn't it work with Yave? Why doesn't she realize that what she's doing is
wrong."
"I believe it did work with Yave, but not as we hoped. We wanted the sword to
remove Yave's anger, to show her that her desire for revenge was misplaced. That may
have simply been beyond the power of the sword. The enchantment does not seem to be
of sheer truth, but of knowledge. In my mind, that is the only explanation. I ask that you
look only to Tun's experience and you will probably agree. After grasping the sword, Tun
knew the sphere was a danger to the dwarves, but he never released his mistrust of our
intentions. He doubted us to the very end. Don't you remember?"
"Yes, but ..."
"But nothing. If the sword had the power to reveal all truth, Tun would have cast aside
his mistrust over our intentions. He never did. The sword simply made him understand
the sphere was a true danger to all the dwarves. That is what made him agree to help us.
Nothing made him trust us."
Ryson shook his head. "That doesn't make any sense. How could the sword reveal to
him knowledge about the sphere, but not knowledge of our true intentions?"
"I have no idea. I am not a spell caster. I have no desire to be one. I only know that it
didn't, and you know it, too. Tun never trusted us. I don't know why, but even though he
knew the sphere had to be destroyed, he held to his suspicions. The sword's enchantment
is beyond my reckoning. I do, however believe there is consistency in its workings. Just
as it did with Tun, I believe the sword imparted knowledge upon Yave. She now knows
what truly happened in Sanctum. I believe that."
"You think so? Then why doesn't she call this off? Why did she throw us in this cell?
Why does she leave her son to be nothing but a mushroom?"
"Because the sword will not change her interpretation of people's intentions. Think of
what happened in Sanctum. Can you remember Tun's death?"
"Of course I can."
The elf detailed his own memories as he tried to forget the surrounding rock. "If the
sword allowed Yave to see that moment exactly as it happened, what would she see? She
would know the sphere kept the algors from controlling the sand giants. She would also
see that Tun struck upon the sand giant on his own, but what else would she see? She
would see us, you and me, Holli and the algors, unable to stop the giant from crushing
Tun. She would see the algors unable to heal her son. She would know all of that now.
How would she interpret it?"
"We tried to help Tun. We didn't just let him get killed," Ryson protested.
"We both know that, but she does not. She did not know our intentions. She does not
trust us. Just like Tun didn't trust us. Tun held to his doubts even after holding the sword.
Now, so does Yave. That is why we are now in this prison."
Lief exhaled again. He rubbed his hands together still trying to ignore the stone which
seemed to close upon him.
Ryson's frustration doubled. "So we came here for nothing? We never had a chance, is
that what you're saying?"
"No, we had a chance. For a brief moment we almost succeeded. You said so yourself.
You saw Yave's face as she held the sword. The sword imparted the knowledge upon her.
It did all that you could have hoped for. For one brief moment, Yave might have even
understood that no one was responsible for Tun's death. That one moment of confusion
and despair on her face, that was our chance. Unfortunately, it did not last. She simply
chose to cling to her anger. We could not control that. Often knowledge and emotion do
not lead to the same results."
Ryson hung his head. "So that's it? What a waste."
"You don't believe that," Lief corrected. "It was not a waste to try. Too many people
agreed to help you for that to be true."
"I don't know what I believe anymore. I just know that people are now in danger
because of me. And there's nothing I can do about it. Maybe I should have done nothing,
stayed in Burbon, helped fight off the dwarves and leave Yave to her madness."
"And let Dunop be destroyed?"
"Better Dunop than Burbon."
"You are speaking out of frustration and anger."
"What else should I speak with?"
"You are taking blame for no reason. Your reason for coming here was of the highest
virtue. You wished to save others."
"And now I might have sacrificed others."
"You came here to try and prevent further tragedy. You did all you could and more.
No one will deny that."
"Why should I care? You think we'll be left to rot in this dungeon."
"I doubt we will get a chance to rot."
The ominous tone of the elf's voice brought revelation to the delver. In an instant, he
recalled what Dunop now faced, what he and Lief now faced. The words fell from his lips
like recalling a nightmare. "The shadow trees."
Lief nodded. "Petiole will drop the seeds for certain when we don't return. That may
be your consolation. Though I see no hope for ourselves, I see hope for Burbon that you
are unwilling to give. Yave has only a small amount of time before the shadow trees fall
upon her palace. And the algors will send their army of sand giants. The dwarf army will
not have an endless opportunity to attack Burbon. Dunop will be destroyed.
Unfortunately, so will we."
Ryson considered his plight. He cared little for his own safety, though thoughts of
being consumed by shadow trees left a cold shiver in his bones. He also felt sadness for
leaving without seeing Linda one last time. The thought of her alone opened a gap in his
spirit which led to even more chills. He took solace in only one thought, the fact that his
own end would mean Burbon would be vulnerable for only a short duration, a few days.
When the seeds fall upon Dunop, threats to Burbon, and to Linda, would end.
His comfort was short-lived. He recalled the faces of the dwarfs he had encountered
during his passage to the palace. Did they deserve the fate of the shadow trees? No. They
were as innocent as the people in Burbon. Despondency seemed to bite at his heels.
A look upon Jon, however, brought fight to his spirit. He thought of Burbon, of Linda,
of seeing her again. "I won't just give up. There has to be some way out of here."
"I am open for suggestions."
"Well, for one thing we can hope the sand giants reach us before the shadow trees."
Lief considered the thought. It held merit. "That may indeed give us a chance. The
sand giants have the power to break through this door. They might ignore us. Their
single-mindedness might keep them from viewing us as an enemy."
"That's what I'm hoping."
"Of course it won't help Jon."
Ryson's spirits dropped slightly. "I didn't think of that."
"You will have to consider it. I know you well enough to realize that you won't just
leave him here to an attacking sand giant. In his current state, he would be helpless. If we
are indeed lucky enough to be freed by the giants, we must consider a way to protect Jon.
Then, there is also the shadow trees. They may be dropped before the sand giants reach
this place. The trees may not be able to break through rock, but their branches can slip
beneath the cracks about the door. We will not be safe in here."
"I know. I'm just hoping we don't have to deal with that. I'm counting on the sand
giants first or the dwarves themselves opening that door. After all, Petiole gave us some
time. That may be what saves our lives. If we can get out of here, we still may have a
chance of stopping this. I can retrieve my sword. Maybe put it in the hands of some of the
other dwarf leaders. I don't know. I'll think of something. I just hope that Holli and Sy
can fight off any dwarf attacks until then."

Yave seethed and ordered an immediate attack. "No more delays, no more waiting!"
Strog protested, the War Com was close to final preparations. "Two more days. That
is all I need."
Yave would not have it, refused the request. They would attack Burbon this very
night.
Strog again resisted. "The main access tunnel from Dunop to Burbon is complete but I
need more time. Several secondary tunnels remain unfinished." His overall plan included
a swarming attack from over two dozen surfacing points. He tried to make the obvious
clear. "If we attacked now, we will be forced to push through only eight or ten subtunnels. My forces would be congested. It would take greater time for them to surface,
longer for them to cover the strategic points needed for victory."
He pointed to his well-crafted plan. He had all the information he needed. There were
no mysteries of Burbon's defenses. The initial strike force repelled by Sy and Enin
provided Strog with a clear layout of the human town. He had chosen several points of
attack based on this information. If allowed to finish the entire set of sub-tunnels, he
could swarm over Burbon in one quick assault. Given the full compliment of his dwarf
army and the all-encompassing details of his invasion plan, he would wipe the surface
clean of Burbon within a quarter of the night. For now, he was simply not ready.
The tunnels were not the only concern. He also needed time for the construction of
war machines. Rock drivers, mobile heavy drills; only a few were complete and ready for
combat. These weapons would ensure the destruction of the wall, towers and many
buildings in mere moments. With a full arsenal, he could guarantee not a single structure
in Burbon would remain standing by midnight.
Yave was far from impressed. Anger burned her thoughts like acid on an open wound.
She would not wait for tomorrow's twilight.
"The attack will begin tonight!" she ordered.
Strog continued to defy her, until she challenged him. She questioned his courage, his
ability to defeat the humans if he did not have his way.
"What would you do if you could not prepare?" she asked. "Are you he afraid of the
humans, are they that much of a threat? If so, perhaps it is time for a new War Com."
Strog fumed, but he realized the precarious weight of his situation. Young separatist
dwarves already scoffed at his preparations. They had their own ideas. The humans were
weak. Why was so much needed to defeat them? The dwarves already suffered one
embarrassment at the hands of this weaker race. It was time the humans learned a lesson,
and learned it now.
His warriors grumbled with impatience. They resisted the work to construct his war
machines. A good dwarf axe was all that was needed, or so they professed. Even his force
commanders revealed reluctance for such measures. They reviewed his tactical points
with half-hearted enthusiasm. Such impudence already forced his ire, more than once,
and upon more than one force commander.
As Yave bellowed for an immediate attack, he thought of these warriors. They would
side with her. It made him sick, but as a strategist, he needed to acknowledge the truth.
Many of the separatist generals openly questioned the value of such preparations for an
obviously inferior race. They wanted an earlier assault as much as the queen. If it came to
a direct challenge between him and Yave, they would not side with him. If she wished to
replace him as War Com, he doubted he could count on even minor support. One of them
would gladly take his place.
Disgusting.
He considered the overwhelming contradictions of these facts. The separatists were
basically anarchists. Or were they? They hated the thought of royalty controlling their
lives. Yet, their hate for the humans and their blind sense of superiority would lead them
to follow this queen, this symbol of the royalty they despised.
Idiots!
What was left for him? Open confrontation with the queen in a struggle he could not
possibly win? He would gain nothing in this. He cursed his fellow generals, cursed their
arrogance and impatience. In the end, he grudgingly accepted his only true course of
action.
Strog heeded to Yave's demands, but he vowed to himself it was his last concession.
After Burbon was defeated, he would strangle her and throw her carcass from the heights
of a palace tower. He would never be put in this situation again. Let her crushed bones
symbolize the end of royal rule in Dunop.
As for the revolution, he now cursed it as well. The followers of this separatist
movement were nothing more than spiteful, jealous jackasses. They cursed the monarchy
because it represented what they did not have. They hated the elves, the algors, and
especially the humans for all the same reason. They were not leaders, they were jelly.
They could be molded by anyone that would feed their pathetic malice. Right now, the
queen gave them their scapegoat, the humans. That's why they would follow her. That
was the only reason.
But after this, after he disposed of Yave. They would follow him. If these so-called
separatists defied him, he would have their heads as well. He doubted that would be
necessary. He would offer them the next prize for their superiority. He would return to
the desert and decimate the algors. That would feed the hate of these so-called separatists.
As Yave turned her back, moved out of the throne room with a victorious grin of
blood thirst, Strog stared at the back of her neck. He could already feel the joy he would
experience when his fingers took hold of that neck. He would not break it. No, her death
would not be quick. He would choke her. Slow and painful. He would laugh as he
released the tension for just a few moments. Let her breath again, just once, just to keep
her conscious for a few more heartbeats. Yes, this would be the last order he would
follow.
Before leaving the throne room, he considered another of the queen's commands. His
eyes found the dwarf cloak that covered the delver's sword. Yave ordered the sword
covered. No one was to touch it. He wondered how long she would let it lie there. More
foolishness. The crumpled cloth rested upon the floor as a testament to the folly of all her
commands.
No more. He decided to make the first direct denial of her authority. He would take
the sword, take it into battle and use it against the humans. Yave would hear of it. Good.
Let her call for him after he returned from destroying Burbon. He would find her, find her
and strangle the life from her. It was long overdue.
For now, he would have to settle for the sword. It beckoned to him as much as Yave's
neck, but this prize he could have immediately. His powerful fingers knifed toward the
neck of the cloak, and he viciously ripped the cover from the fallen weapon.
The sword beamed bright. The throne room bathed in the light of a hundred stars. The
blade glowed with white fire, yet the light did not burn the eyes of the dwarf, it welcomed
them. This weapon would be his.
His powerful arm reached to the floor. He took hold of the handle and lifted the sword
to his face. He gazed with wonder up and down the glowing blade. He knew of this
sword, knew it was labeled as the Sword of Decree. Ryson Acumen carried it within
Sanctum Mountain. It was the weapon which destroyed Ingar's sphere. It was now his,
and it would now mark his place in the legends.
As if responding to his wishes, the sword began to glow even brighter. It surged with
power and many secrets revealed themselves to the holder. Revelations washed over
Strog like a raging flood. He saw Holli and Sy building defenses. He understood their
tactics at once. Their plan was sound, the strategy brilliant. The humans and elf archers
represented a great threat to the dwarf army.
Still, he almost laughed. Now that he knew their true plan of defense, the danger
vaporized. He would now alter his plans, attack the wall from the foundations beneath the
ground. Not a single dwarf would be sent into the streets until the wall and every
structure of Burbon was collapsed from below the soil. The archers would not be given a
single target. He would sweep away the survivors in the rubble. Now, Burbon truly did
not have a chance.
He saw more.
He saw the algors carving sand giants in the desert. Another threat. One he did not
previously consider. They would be on the march soon. They would use the very tunnels
dug by the dwarves which led to the sandstone mountain.
Let them come.
He would leave the tunnels intact. He would wait for the sand giants to move through
the openings into Dunop, but there they would fall. He would simply place a force of
dwarves with rock crushers at the entrance. Sand giants would be a great threat in hand to
hand combat, but he would not allow that. Catapults would bury the giants in boulders of
granite. Pile drivers would break them apart, and diamond headed drills would grind
them back into sand.
The revelations still did not end.
He saw a serp in the hills outside of Burbon, a serp watching this war very closely.
The serp controlled many goblins, even a shag. Strog could not surmise what the creature
truly wanted, but he knew such a serp presented yet another threat, one to be watched
closely.
In this moment of discovery, Strog envisioned his growing power. He would be
revered by other dwarves as a savior. He would lead Dunop into history with one victory
after another. He would...
He saw the seeds. The elder elf of Dark Spruce even now was calling for them. The
elves were preparing to drop them, not just yet, but soon. In the darkness of Dunop, they
would grow. The shadow trees.
Fear gripped him like a shag trap. He trembled. No way to fight. No way to win. His
army would be strangled in dark branches of death. His strategies and tactics would be
useless. The image grew clearer in his mind. He saw Petiole, Petiole with the seeds. They
would fall upon Dunop like rain. They would grow. Dunop would be destroyed. He
would die a terrible, painful death.

"Strog has left."
Yave looked at the servant, but said nothing. She knew Strog did not want to attack
Burbon on this night. He was delaying. She would not have it, no more time would be
wasted. The humans would die tonight.
"Tell Voth Stonepillar that he is now the new War Com. He will lead our forces
against Burbon tonight."
The servant hesitated. He mumbled the words, but spoke clear enough for Yave to
comprehend. "The delver's sword was found uncovered in the throne room, your
majesty."
Yave erupted. "Have it covered immediately! No one is to touch it. When Strog is
found, have him executed on sight. The same goes to any dwarf that touches the sword.
See to it now!"
The servant turned and ran from the queen's quarters.
Yave snarled. "That bastard. What did he see?"
She would never know for Strog was never found.

Voth Stonepillar took joy in bringing the force commanders under his authority, and
they took joy in his desire for quick vengeance upon the humans.
"We attack tonight" the new War Com announced haughtily. "We will waste no more
time on the construction of any war machines. In fact, I see no reason why we should
weigh our warriors down with the burden of lugging them to Burbon. We will leave them
here and attack in force as we did in Connel. How many surfacing tunnels have we
constructed off the main tunnel?"
"Eight, sir," came a proud response.
"That is all we will need. Bring the diggers back now." Voth stole a glimpse out the
window. The meager light of Dunop was already beginning to fade. The sun was setting
on the surface.
"Strog was such a fool," he declared without challenge. "If he had prepared for an
attack rather than waste time digging all those tunnels, we would have already destroyed
Burbon. As it is, we will not have time for a twilight attack."
He turned his gaze back to Strog's battle plan. He wanted to crumple it in a bold
display of his own superiority, but he needed the map. He shook his fist as he called for
the attention of his underlings.
"We still shall attack tonight. All squads will have the same orders. We are not here to
take supplies of the humans. We don't need them. The thrust of each team shall be to kill
the humans and destroy their structures. Anything else will be a waste of our time. I will
assign each of you to a surfacing tunnel. In most cases, there will be at least five force
commanders per tunnel. Therefore, I will also assign a number and direction for your
squads. You will follow these numbers for your surfacing. After that, I leave you to your
own discretion. Find the humans and kill them all. Leave no structure standing. Have all
your warriors prepared for a midnight strike."

Holli walked the wall. She nodded silently to those that offered a greeting. It was cold
in the open air. Cold and dark. The light was focused on the ground. It would be easier to
spot targets that way, easier to spot dwarves.
She doubted that would be the case tonight. It was long after sunset, much closer to
midnight. She looked to the sky. Clouds hid the stars. She wondered if it might snow. It
was early, but the dormant season was on its way. A few flurries in the dead of night
would not be unheard of.
The thought of snow brought her a sense of peace. Quiet filled the land, a quiet she did
not previously anticipate. In truth, she had expected an attack this night. Though neither
she nor the human wizard could sense dwarves, Enin had cast a spell to sense the shifting
of the ground. He said it was something like the web spell he created to catch the goblins.
A powerful wizard. He detected the dwarves as they dug. They were constructing their
tunnels directly beneath the center of town. When he professed that afternoon that the
digging had ceased, Holli could only conclude that an attack was imminent.
With Sy's approval, she had placed the defenders on their highest alert. She brought all
the archers, both human and elf, to the walls and rooftops just before twilight. That was
the normal time for a dwarf attack. It gave them the whole evening before they had to
deal with the rising sun and its affect on their eyes. It was at that time Holli truly believed
the attack would commence.
It did not.
Time passed as Holli steadied her archers and slingers, leaping from rooftop to rooftop
like a squirrel dancing among the trees.
Sy stood with his ground forces in cold silence. He let his steel nerve lift the courage
of his soldiers. Enin moved about the town like a shadow of death. There was no gleam
in his eye or prattling of new spells, only stark concentration on gathering every shred of
magic lingering in the air.
The entire population of Burbon had waited at the ready in eerie silence. Frightened
civilians, facing battle for the first time in their lives, gulped back their fear. Guards upon
the ground, soldiers with the deadly task of diverting the dwarf warriors into the many
crossfires, stood almost breathless. Silent prayers lingered on their lips. When someone
coughed, it echoed through the streets like the death rattle of a god.
They had waited, but still nothing had happened. The sun set, the darkness grew, but
still nothing. They spent the entire part of dusk and well into the darkness of evening
ready to defend. Human and elf waited with growing anxiety. As all light vanished to the
west, the tension increased to a point of frustration. They did not want to fight, did not
want this war, but few could withstand the heavy weight of the seemingly endless vigil.
Sy had called to Holli only a short while ago, when he sensed the growing impatience
of his soldiers. He asked for her council, openly wondered if the dwarves might be
holding off for greater surprise.
Holli doubted it. She could not imagine dwarf commanders feeling the need for
surprise to attack humans. She began to wonder herself if the attack would actually take
place.
Her opinion was overheard and her words quickly spread. Relief began to replace the
tension. Holli and Sy did not fight it. Half the volunteers were allowed to return to their
homes for rest and food. They would return after midnight to relieve those that stayed in
position.
Holli remained alert, however, even as her forces broke in half. She stayed with the
defenders, she would take no rest this evening. She would wait until after sunrise before
she would even consider sleep.
As for now, she welcomed the peace as she walked the length of the wall. It was
surely close to midnight and hard to imagine a dwarf attack this late in the night. The
dwarves had granted them a reprieve. Perhaps they would attack tomorrow. Or perhaps
there would be no battle at all.
She thought of Ryson. She would hear word soon. Elf guards acting as scouts at the
perimeter of Dark Spruce already informed her that Ryson had returned without the cliff
behemoth. Not words she wanted to hear, but they also told her he went to Dunop
anyway. He would enlighten Yave with the Sword of Decree. That brought her hope.
Maybe that was the reason for the peace on this evening.
Enin broke that peace.
"Holli! They're back. They're digging again."
"Where?"
"Close. Very close to the surface."
She almost cursed, but she discarded her emotions. She became as dark as an assassin
and as determined as the north wind in a snow storm. She called first to the closest tower.
"Tower guard! Light your signal fires. Alert all positions, we are under attack! Have
the bell rung. Everyone is to return to their posts."
The bell rang immediately. The clang broke the peace just as the thought of battle
chased away the cold. Clamoring in the streets followed. Those previously resting in their
homes hurried into the streets. They looked to the towers first and read the signal fires.
The message confirmed their greatest fears. Most ran to their positions, though some lost
their courage, and took back to their homes.
Holli turned to those around her, to the humans that stood on the wall. Most of them
never held a bow before two days ago, and except for a few professional soldiers, none
had ever faced battle. She gave them a quick nudge of encouragement.
"Hold to your positions. Remember the men and women that risk their lives on the
ground. For them, for your homes, pick your targets and aim with a mind to the threat this
enemy represents. Distance yourself from fear, remorse or regret. Become the tool of
your own survival."
She turned back to Enin who stood upon the ground below her. "How close are they to
the surface?"
"They are moving up fast. The ground is in total upheaval."
Holli looked to the ladders filled with defenders. Many struggled to climb quickly. In
their haste, they were creating bottlenecks. It would take time to redeploy the full
compliment of the archers and slingers.
Better news on the streets. Sy had the ground forces in position. The diversions would
start well coordinated. Group leaders were already communicating through hand signals.
All lamps burned brightly and the streets remained well lit. The nets and bulwarks waited
as formidable obstacles to keep the dwarves from reaching key defense points. When the
enemy surfaced, they would face considerable challenges, and a hail of arrow fire if the
archers would only reach their positions in time.
As if to crush this hope, the first dwarf burst through the ground within one block of
Holli's position. After the digger broke open the surfacing point, warrior dwarves began
to pour out the opening.
Holli called out her first battle commands. "Tower guard. First dwarf tunnel at
southwest region, block four. Signal all posts. Archers hold your fire. Let the ground
forces bring them to the ambush points."
Holli looked again to the archers struggling to reach their elevated positions. Too
many of them remained stranded on the ground or fighting to climb the ladders. She
scanned the streets, searching for more dwarf surfacing tunnels. To her surprise, she
could not find any others.
"Only one," she mumbled to herself with slight surprise. "I would have thought they
would have been better coordinated. If we could just ..."
She stopped herself in mid-sentence as she yelled a request to the wizard. "Enin?! Can
you seal that tunnel? Just for a moment. We need just a little more time."
Enin answered in the form of action. His arms spread over his head. The familiar
white circles found their place at his wrists. With a flash of his hands, the circles erupted
into a blast of energy which cascaded across the air like the rolling wheels of a freight
train. The two circles of magic power plowed into the ground atop the opening of the
dwarf tunnel. A seal of white magic formed about the opening, closing the exit to
hundreds of dwarves still beneath the surface.
Enin called back to Holli. "They'll dig around it, but it will take some time. The spell
will fade quickly anyway. It would take too much energy to keep it in place for long. You
have only a few extra moments."
"That's all we need. Thank you. Make haste wizard. I fear you will be needed more
this evening and you are vulnerable upon the ground."
Enin smiled. The elf not only requested his assistance, but acknowledged he would be
needed again. He nodded his head before he swirled away in another direction.
Holli surveyed the current situation. All the archers were moving quickly now. A
signal came from the tower across town to the east, then another from the north. Two
more surfacing points appeared. She could not hope to seal those, but it no longer
mattered. They appeared too late to take advantage of the momentary scramble. Her
forces were now almost completely in place.
Another signal, another opening in the ground. The mass of the dwarf army would
begin its swarm soon enough, but for now, she turned her attention to the first true threat.
Roughly thirty dwarves had surfaced from the first tunnel before Enin had sealed it.
Their force commander was with them and had them in formation. The commander was
taking his time, making observations as he waited for the remainder of his force to break
through the blocked exit point. This was a seasoned warrior.
"Taking him out would certainly add to our advantage," Holli whispered.
Her hands took to her bow. An arrow found the string. With fluid movement, her deft
fingers pulled back the bow string and released it in one quick motion. The arrow sizzled
through the dark, the feathers whistling through time and space. The razor sharp tip
plunged in to the force commander's neck, just above his armored breast plate.
The dwarf did not fall immediately. He fought against the gripping hands of death. He
pulled the shaft from his body and threw it with disgust. He could not see the wound but
he knew it was mortal. He glared back at the source of the strike, fiery hate raged in his
eyes. He spat in Holli's direction before he crumpled to the ground.
At first, the surfaced dwarves held their formation in the face of their commander's
death, but many were raw recruits of the separatist movement. Like the humans on the
wall, they had never faced true battle. Without a force commander, they shuffled about
their positions. They looked to the sealed tunnel. Diggers were finally breaking around
Enin's force field. Hope of reinforcements held them in place. They waited impatiently
for support and for guidance.
Holli pressed upon their growing uncertainty. She ordered the archers around her to
send a single volley of arrows at the dwarves. There was an immediate response.
The twang of bowstrings was nearly simultaneous. Dozens of arrows cut through the
night, harbingers of death for the dwarf invaders. Some of the shafts bore the carved
inscription of "Dwarf". Many of the tips were coated with poison.
Holli methodically surveyed the damage. Most arrows plunged into the ground. Others
slammed against dwarf armor, the shafts shattering as the tips flattened against iron chest
plates or helmets. A handful, however, found their mark and five dwarfs dropped with
fatal or serious wounds. She was pleased.
She stroked their confidence. "Good shooting, excellent shooting."
The dwarves below began to break. They scattered with little thought to direction.
Some came to the wall and Holli ordered another volley. More dwarves fell. The archers
cheered.
Holli nodded in approval. Over a dozen dwarves were down. The survivors ran
without formation, no longer a threat. They would be taken out by other archers on
rooftops or by Sy's men.
The thought of the ground forces compelled her to consider the battle as a whole. She
looked to the towers. Signals of dwarf movement were becoming more frequent. Based
on this information, she calculated only seven or eight surfacing points, more good news
for she expected over a dozen. At the beginning, the dwarf forces would be clustered
together, easier targets for her archers. She needed to move to other areas to check on
their progress. Before she left, she handed command over to the senior guard soldier.
"Keep them firing at the surface point. Try to hold them down there as long as
possible. They won't stop coming up. There's probably hundreds down there. Slow them
as much as you can and don't let your people get discouraged."
She yelled her final directions for all to hear.
"There is a long night ahead. Keep your fire focused on that surfacing point. Don't all
fire at once. Remember your training. Shoot in groups of five, reload and wait for your
turn to fire again. A constant barrage is better than intermittent larger ones, so keep the
arrows flying. Pick you targets and try to make every arrow count. Don't be fooled.
They'll eventually realize your position and they will come after you. If they attack the
wall, break to safety and fire again. I'll be back as soon as possible."

Sy did not have to speak a single command to keep his men in the ready. His ground
troops were the finest of Burbon. The elite. They knew their task, knew every hand signal
of the group leaders. They waited within dark warehouses, in narrow alleys, and at
crucial crossroads. They read the signal torches in the towers and knew of the dwarf
positions before the battle commenced. The strategy of the elf guard and their own
captain remained imprinted in their every thought. They held to their broadswords and
shields as if these weapons were but extensions of their own arms. They waited with
patience, without fear.
The first of the ground forces to go into action was granted a reprieve when Enin
sealed the initial dwarf surfacing point. They would get another chance, but they would
have to wait. They pulled back, returned to a dark alley as the situation was signaled to
other commanders.
The second dwarf tunnel opened up near the eastern tower directly across from Holli's
original position. Ground forces under the command of Ray Coale immediately readied
for the first engagement. Coale's men, numbering twenty, waited in an abandoned
warehouse as Coale signaled the enemy position and his intentions to the other group
leaders in the vicinity. He would distract the dwarves from this tunnel and lead them to a
crossfire of slingers and archers three blocks to the west.
The dwarf tunnel appeared just one block from the warehouse's main door. The street
lamps burned bright and the dwarves surfaced in clear sight. Coale counted off the
dwarves as they rose from the tunnel. He watched carefully as they took their formation.
They moved slowly, but deliberately. A dwarf force commander rattled off angry orders.
As the dwarf leader called for a formation, the first thirty dwarves formed a three pointed
wedge. They wore heavy armor. Coale could only imagine the strength needed to carry
such weight in battle. The dwarves carried weapons of raw power, weapons such as axes
and maces. A few held broadswords and mauls, but he saw no bows, long or cross.
With the formation in place, the first dwarf assault group moved forward. They
stepped slowly almost clumsily, and in that, Coale's confidence grew.
Coale shifted his concentration from the surfacing point to the moving formation.
More dwarves continued to evacuate from the hole, but Coale would not concern himself
with these. He signaled the next closest ground team to divert this second enemy
formation. The first would belong to him. He gave his first order just above a whisper.
"Loose circles. Keep them at bay, engage long enough to get their interest, then pull
back at my command. Nothing fancy, no heroes means no casualties. Let the long rage
defenders earn their keep. We'll sure as blazes be earning ours."
He moved out first with a staunch yell. He took to the open street and his men filled in
behind him. They did as he asked, forming four loose circles, each of five men. They
spread out knowing their greatest advantage was not their height, but their
maneuverability.
Coale, a large man, towered over the approaching dwarves. He held out his sword
with menace. His own bulk matched the stockiness of the dwarves, yet his greater height
gave him overall size superiority. He motioned for the dwarves to attack, if they dared.
They did so with fervor.
The charge of the dwarves was almost laughable. They moved with all the speed and
grace of an anchored cargo ship. Yet, no soldier could deny their uncanny strength or
their unyielding will to conquer the enemy.
Under Coale's immediate direction, the circle formations spread wide and moved with
the dwarf assault. Soldiers back-pedaled slowly, allowing the dwarves to close only
slightly. Three of the four circle formations each drew a bead on one of the three wedge
points. The fourth waited in the rear as support.
Coale displayed caution with his antagonism. He allowed the dwarf force commander
to believe he was willing to engage, but he was also moving with care. He gave ground
slowly, showing no sign of his true intentions. The dwarves continued to pursue even as
he led them to the place of their destruction.
As the invaders drew close, the soldiers at the forward points of the circles jabbed out
with their swords. Those in the rear called out advances as the soldiers on the side
perimeters stepped up and back to disorient the enemy's perspective of distance.
Coale kept a constant flow of backward movement, slow enough to keep the dwarves
interested, fast enough to keep from full engagement. A few times, he allowed the
invaders close enough to make a single strike. Blows from axes that landed upon his
shield split the metal with long gashes. The power of the attacking dwarf vibrated
through his own arm and shook his entire body. In such instances, he revealed no
surprise, only a bizarre grin which enticed the dwarves into further pursuit.
As the conflict slowly yielded to a large open square, Coale suddenly ordered a fast
retreat. The circle formations of his own men quickly dissipated as the soldiers took off to
the four corners of the square.
The dwarves were left swinging at air as they could not pursue with the same speed.
The dwarf commander eyed his surroundings and saw open streets in four separate
directions. He quickly ordered the wedge to break into a square. He took the center as he
attempted to surmise Coale's next move. He could not believe his eyes.
Coale's men took hold of long lines hanging from building corners. They pulled upon
them with furious desire. Thick nets dropped from above and blocked all points of escape
for the dwarves. Just as the last net hit the ground, arrows and rocks fell like rain from the
sky.
The square formation broke as dwarves ran for cover that did not exist. Some hoped to
cut the nets with their axes, but they moved so slow they fell victim before they could
reach their target. Those that survived the volley of arrows, felt the sting of swords from
Coale's men. Again, just as Holli's first ranged attack met with complete success, the first
ground engagement proved one-sided with the dwarves on the losing end.

Sy read the signals of these initial successes just as his own contingent was about to
enter the battle. The eighth and final surfacing point appeared four blocks from his
position. He could not have asked for better placement, and he wondered how the
dwarves could have made such a tactical error. He could only assume the dwarves hastily
completed their tunnels without scouting. If they had, they would have never chosen this
point for surfacing, and he would not allow this blunder to go unpunished. In response to
the dwarf miscalculation, he moved his attack group immediately, even as the first
dwarves emerged.
The tunnel opened upon the street just in front of a sturdy barricade. Two separate
lines of heavy tree trunks blocked all northern passage. Sharpened ends pointed down to
dwarf level, waited like the fanged smile of a dragon. When the first dwarf commander
struck to the surface, she cursed this dilemma. She did not expect the humans to prepare
such bulwarks. Her forces could break them, but it would slow them and they were
already bottlenecked in the tunnel.
Sy double-timed his men up from the south as he blessed his own luck. Two bands of
archers and one group of slingers waited upon the rooftops directly over the dwarf tunnel.
They waited for his signal, without giving away their own position to the enemy. They
moved into place silently overhead, using the shadows for cover, and though the dwarves
could see through this darkness, they did not think to look skyward.
This was a definite ambush point, a place Sy had hoped to bring the enemy, a place
like many others around Burbon where the battle would be fought to their own
advantage. The dwarves had stumbled upon it now by their own choosing. If Sy could
keep them here, the dwarf army would suffer greatly.
His first battle command was to light two waiting hay carts ablaze. His men sent the
flaming wagons directly at the tunnel entrance. The dwarves struck at the carriages,
breaking them into splinters, but the burning hay dropped upon them like scorching rain.
The darkness overhead scattered and the entire dwarf position looked like a fireworks
display.
Sy signaled for the ranged attack to begin with the attack of the carts. Arrows and
rocks followed the burning hay. The initial barrage was awe-inspiring as dwarfs
crumbled in surprise as well as agony. The flying embers blinded them to the archers'
position. They could not comprehend the depth of their situation.
The dwarf formations broke apart before they could take hold. The force commander
cursed her own warriors, screamed at them to fall into place, but only confusion reigned.
Despite her ranting, the warriors sought safety that did not exist. Some attempted to
scramble back down the tunnel which served only to slow the exiting dwarves even more.
Sy's men lit another cart, then another. They kept these at hand, used them to block
any southern escape. The bright light of the fires dissuaded the dwarves from
approaching. Sy's men stood without challenge while the enemy fought against the volley
of arrows and stones from above.
The dwarves were trapped and many panicked, but the force commander kept her
head. She crouched low and used her armor as protection against the hail of projectiles.
She ordered her warriors to follow suit. If they could maintain a formation, she knew they
could break through the northern bulwark with their axes.
Her warriors failed to respond. Only a handful followed her direction, and though
these were safe for the moment, they could only watch as their comrades fell. Those that
lost their heads scurried about against her orders. They moved in anger and in confusion.
They set at first to breaking the bulwark. When they could not reach it, desperation led
them to the flaming carts.
With some dwarves now moving toward the wagons, Sy ordered the appropriate
response. As many of his men had crossbows draped over their backs, he directed their
immediate use. Now, arrows struck from ground level as well as above. The arrows cut
down the dwarves in handfuls. The dead piled about the surfacing point. His men
remained calm even as the invaders hastened about in pure confusion.
Sy signaled the situation to the surrounding group leaders. He read the responding
signal fires from the towers. He was not alone in success. The first battles were indeed
going their way. Ground forces all over town were diverting dwarf attack parties into
waiting ambushes while archers were keeping a steady stream of arrows upon every
surfacing tunnel. From what he could tell, the dwarves were armed only with standard
weapons. There was not a single report of a war machine. The enemy had come with
arrogance and was now paying the price.
Sy hoped the price would include a hasty retreat, an end to this battle before it
wrought even more carnage, but the fury he saw in the dwarf commander kept him from
holding long to such hope.

Voth Stonepillar growled at the dwarves in front of him. His forces were not moving
quickly enough through the tunnels. He was trapped below the surface long beyond what
he had hoped. Worse, he began hearing reports of battles, battles with unsettling
outcomes. Dwarf casualty reports were mounting even as he stood stuck in that infernal
tunnel.
"What is happening?" he demanded of his aide-de-camp.
The aide could not answer. He was stuck as well, and there was no room in the tunnel
for a forward runner. Every single branch of the main tunnel was clogged with dwarf
warriors. Only rumors drifted back from the lines.
"Why aren't we moving?" Voth demanded again.
"The main body of our force is progressing," the aide assured without really knowing.
"How do you know?" Voth snarled.
The aide decided to return to silence.
Voth's patience was as at an end. He began pushing his way forward. Warriors ahead
of him scowled and cursed, until they saw his armor crest. In the presence of the War
Com, they quickly bit back their complaints.
Voth moved to a sub-tunnel which led to the western edge of Burbon. He continued to
press through the packed corridor even as his aide became trapped in the cluster of
dwarves. Cursing and shouting, the new War Com pushed to the end of the passage. Just
at the surfacing point, his eyes fell heavy upon the dwarf in charge of attack coordination.
His hands fell even heavier as he took hold of the monitor by the armor.
"What is going on?"
"We are being slowed," the monitor replied with distaste for Voth's hold upon him.
Voth did not remove his thick hands. "Slowed by what?!"
The coordinator pushed Voth's hands away. He had no love or respect for this War
Com. Strog was the true War Com, replaced unjustly by the royalist swine that dared to
call herself queen.
Voth stared in disbelief at the monitor's disrespect. "Slowed by what?" he repeated.
"Resistance!" the coordinator replied with defiance.
"Resistance? From the humans? That's impossible. Get these warriors moving. I want
them up on the surface immediately!"
"Fine."
The coordinator waved to the waiting warriors. "You heard the War Com. Get
moving. Everybody moves."
The first warriors in line hesitated.
Voth exploded. He grabbed one around the waist and literally threw the warrior up
beyond the opening. He grabbed others waiting behind and forced them upon the surface
as well. The line started to move and Voth's face lit up with satisfaction. He turned upon
the coordinator with vengeance.
"You are relieved of your post and duty. The queen will be interested to hear how you
have slowed our progress."
The monitor did not need to reply. A chorus of death cries from outside the tunnel
formed a response for him. He simply looked upon the War Com with his own silent
satisfaction.
Voth stopped the line. "What was that?"
"The death of twenty or so warriors. Their blood is on your hands."
"What are you talking about?"
"I'm talking about the resistance from the humans. They have already pinpointed this
tunnel. They have nets surrounding the opening. They also have a host of archers on
rooftops and out of our reach. As soon as our warriors file into a formation to tear down
the nets, they get routed."
"Archers? Nets?"
"Yes. Leaving this tunnel is like committing suicide."
"Then send them down another tunnel," Voth ordered.
"Which one? There are only eight. There are already too many dwarves per surfacing
point. We have close to a thousand dwarves backed up at this one alone. Every one is
clogged and I assume every one is under heavy attack."
"This can't be."
"But it is. If we had used Strog's battle plan, this never would have happened. Our
entire force would already be upon the surface. We would have been able to bring down
the walls and buildings the archers are standing upon. Instead, we are stuck down here
while the humans pick us off despite our superiority in arms, strength, and numbers."
"Strog is gone," Voth shot back, unable to respond in any other fashion. "We have to
attack with what we have."
"Don't be a fool. These warriors do not deserve to die. Give them a chance at victory."
"And what is it you suggest? What great plan do you have?"
Voth did not expect an answer, but he received one just the same.
"I've already called for diggers to branch off this tunnel toward the wall. They will
surface at its base. That is where the greatest number of archers are positioned. We will
surface there and crumble the wall. A force commander can then take a formation to rip
apart the nets that contain this tunnel. Once the nets are down. We can exit from both
points. If we get four strike teams of fifty warriors each, led by seasoned force
commanders, upon the streets, we can begin to take the battle to the humans."
"You ordered this on your own?"
"I did."
Voth boiled but withheld any condemnation. He turned with a defeated grumble.
"Send a runner back to keep me informed. I will see to the remainder of our forces."

Sy kept his men in tight formation. They jabbed at any dwarf that succeeded in
reaching the still blazing carriages, but they did not engage beyond that point. Arrows
from crossbows saw to the demise of any surviving stragglers.
Even as the dwarves fell, one sight disturbed the captain of the guard greatly. Despite
the number of dwarves that had succumbed to the ambush, dozens more continued to
emerge from the underground tunnel. After fifty, he hoped they would slow. After a
hundred, he hoped they would stop. They did neither. It quickly became a matter of
numbers. There were not enough arrows and stones to keep all these dwarves at bay.
Worse, the dwarves that now surfaced and witnessed the carnage began following the
advice of the force commander. As she remained crouched upon the open ground, she
was nearly invulnerable to the barrage of projectiles. Though dozens of arrows struck her,
they bounced harmlessly off her armor. As the other invaders now followed her example,
the number of threats on the surface increased exponentially.
With a formidable force now on the surface, the commander called for the execution
of a battle plan. She used the blade of her axe to cover her face as she called orders to the
others. Slowly, they fell into formation to handle the bulwark. Tightly bound together,
they used each other as shields. They trudged forward to the pointed stumps of the
northern obstacle. Once in arms reach, one after another would rise up and swing an axe
or mace. Their mighty weapons made short work of the barricade. Splinters of tree trunks
quickly replaced the once formidable bulwark. With the northern passage free, the force
commander ordered an immediate advance.
Sy followed with an order of retreat. He did not wish to leave the tunnel unattended,
but it was now necessary. If they remained, he knew what would happen. The force
commander was probably circling around even now. If he kept his soldiers in place, he
would be caught between her and the tunnel. There would be no escape.
He signaled his new plans to the archers as he moved his force quickly to the west.
Before leaving, he took one last glance at the battleground. Dead dwarves lie strewn
across the open road like lumps of stone in a gravel pit. He estimated well over two
hundred casualties for the enemy and none for his own force. Even with such
overwhelming evidence of a one-sided battle, Sy could not chase the feeling of
impending disaster.
Perhaps it was the number of dwarves that continued to file out of the tunnel, or
perhaps it was the cold chill in the air beyond the burning wagons, but whatever caused
it, Sy felt little more than dread for the remainder of the battle.

Enin walked silently through the streets unseen by both friends and foes. A spell of
deception hid his existence. The light bent around him. Emptiness swallowed his
footfalls. It was not quite invisibility, for he could be seen if one looked directly at him
and was well aware of his presence. If not, he was nothing more than a disturbance in the
air, a breeze not worth noticing.
From alley to alley, he moved through the town examining every facet of the
burgeoning battle. It became quickly apparent that Sy's faith in Holli would be rewarded.
The placement of troops and obstacles blended together perfectly. The advantage rested
squarely with the town's defenders. As the number of fallen dwarfs mounted, Enin could
not find a single wounded human. As dwarves fell to the host of arrows and stones, they
could not lay their hands upon the daring defenders. Ropes and ladders allowed ground
troops to escape the wrath of this short-armed enemy. Dwarves were left grasping at air,
cursing the humans and facing a hail of projectiles.
He continued to drink in the magic as he watched the ongoing battle with great
attachment. He could not distance himself from his neighbors that fought so bravely, and
though he wished to conserve his energy, he could not refrain from assisting in his own
unique way.
He cast only a few minor spells, nothing to call attention to himself. He cast near
invisibility upon a group of trapped soldiers to help them escape. He strengthened a
barricade forcing dwarves to turn into another ambush. He crumbled the opening of one
of the dwarves surfacing tunnels with a wind spin. His acts saved lives. This he knew, but
he knew more.
An awareness sparked within his essence. Beyond the sensation of magic, beyond the
spell allowing him to read minds, he could sense the very soul of this battle. It was taking
shape before him, growing like an infected wound. It grew angrier, a hurricane feeding
on warm waters. It was feeding on the emotions of the participants, from fear to courage,
from anger to exultation.
He looked to the sky above and beyond. In a moment of sheer cognizance, he saw the
universe, the dimensions above, beyond and within. In an instant, he understood how the
magic opened pathways for the dark creatures to enter his land. He saw the true homes of
goblins and shags. He shivered.
Yet, with each fear came hope. He understood the immortality of his own soul. He
saw the unending path of life. Circles, declines, ascents; the avenues were endless. He
understood death and its lie to those unaware. Above all, he saw the true faces of angels
and demons. To this point they came. They waited, the angels with patience, the demons
with hunger. They were here to collect the souls of the dead, to guide or to trap. This
battle was calling to them. This battle would offer them much.
Tears rolled down Enin's cheeks. Tears of joy, tears of despair; he experienced joy for
what he was becoming, suffered despair for what was happening around him. He
understood that this battle was only beginning. Death would take many more before this
night was over, more from both sides. How many of his friends would die on this day?
How many souls would be lost because of this monumental stupidity?
But what of him? He was growing in power, growing in knowledge. He could save
them.

The tide of battle turned with the first collapsing portion of the wall. The
supplementary tunnel which allowed the dwarves access to its base gave them their first
success. Heavy maces broke the foundation, and the wall section collapsed instantly. A
dozen archers fell with the stone, fell into the waiting hands of the enemy. Death was
quick, if not clean. The heavy ball of a mace did as much damage to human bone as it did
to stone and wood.
More dwarves surfaced and more of the wall was destroyed. Dwarf force commanders
brought their warriors into attack formations and brought down the nets with razor sharp
axes. After that, the change of fortunes was so swift it was almost frightening.
Seven strike squads took off in separate directions and the dwarves now had
unrestricted access to the surface. In mere moments, they took control of a three block
square. Buildings supporting archers were brought down with crashing immediacy. The
strike squads under the barking orders of seasoned force commanders advanced with
great destruction. Crash after crash filled the night. Burbon was being taken apart piece
by piece.
As the invaders took greater ground, their own strength increased. Surfacing points
were cleared of threats and the number of surface bound invaders grew with leaps and
bounds. More strike squads formed and their ability to encompass larger sections of
Burbon expanded.
The human ground forces tried to break the attackers, divert them to new ambush
points. This time, the dwarves did not respond. They ignored the diversions, keeping their
mind and weapons upon the structures that held the ranged threats. More and more
archers and slingers were brought to the ground with the sheer force of the enemy's
numbers and power.
There was little the defenders could do. They were now out positioned by a force with
strength beyond their reckoning. How could they fight a foe which could destroy their
defenses with a single swing?
Desperation overwhelmed the human ground forces. They forgot their initial
successes. They began frontal assaults and full engagement with the enemy. Dire results.
Soldier after soldier fell as the dwarf warriors moved forward.
Holli leapt about the town with speed almost matching a delver. She ordered all
archers to shoot and move. It was their only chance. If they stayed positioned, they were
inviting disaster.
On the ground, Sy recalled all the ground forces. He rallied them at the center of
Burbon in front of the guard headquarters. He ordered a rearming. They would switch to
poison-tipped spears and crossbows and hold an angled line which would cut from here
to the two eastern corners of town.
Holli noted the adjustment and redeployed her archers to hold firm at these lines. She
dropped to the ground to meet with the captain.
"I never could have guessed they would have sent so many," she apologized.
Sy focused on the here and now. "What is it going to take to stop them?"
Holli said nothing, but the question was answered.
"I can stop them." Enin seemed to appear out of no where. Seriousness covered his
face like a death mask.
The darkness of his expression took the breath from both Holli and Sy.
The elf recovered first. "What will you do?"
"I can blind them and disrupt the ground beneath them. Attacking then directly will be
of little value. As you well know, they are resistant to magic, but they are not as resistant
to the blinding light of the sun. That is what they will see. They will also not be able to
stand upon ground that shakes or in tunnels that collapse. The two spells combined will
leave them defenseless for a temporary period. If you charge them, they will not be able
to protect themselves."
Holli remained reserved. "A spell of light that strong will take a great deal of power."
"I have spent the night collecting what will be necessary."
"There are thousands of warriors on the surface. You can hit them all?"
"The light will form right above us. Any dwarf that looks towards us will be blinded
momentarily. As for the force blast, I will succeed in knocking a good number off their
feet, many unconscious. I will not be able to seal the tunnels completely, but it will
certainly cause havoc down there."
Sy finally managed to enter the conversation. "Will they retreat?"
Enin spoke with cold confidence. "I would bet on it. They will not like what they see."
Sy asked the only remaining question. "What will it do to you?"
"It will exhaust me, that is all. I won't be able to cast many spells for a while, but I will
certainly survive."
Holli's doubt over the spell caster's knowledge surfaced one last time. "Do you really
know what you're doing?"
Enin did not answer.
Sy did not accept the silence. "Well? Is there a danger to us?"
"No more danger than those approaching dwarves," Enin replied logically.
Sy glanced down the western streets leading to the town center. Two dozen formations
of dwarves crept closer. He estimated close to twelve hundred dwarves closing on his
position. He wondered how many stalked him from back alleys. He surveyed the number
of his own men. Maybe a few hundred on the ground, he wasn't sure how many archers
remained on the rooftops. He couldn't hope to divert this many dwarves, couldn't possibly
stop them. They would take the guard quarters and the store of weapons. What would
happen if they armed themselves with the crossbows that waited in the stock rooms?
"Do what you have to do," the captain said firmly.
"I will prepare the archers to fire after you cast your spells," Holli echoed without
emotion. She shimmied up a dangling rope as if it were a tree branch. In a single blink of
the eye, she was upon the rooftops and readying her ranged attackers.
Enin gave her but short notice. Once he saw the elf on her way, his concentration fell
upon his own task. He gripped his hands before him, whispered words unintelligible to
those around him. He began to glow, brighter than the surrounding lamps. He appeared to
burn, a flaming phoenix of white magic. His words grew in volume and power.
The dwarf invaders came to an abrupt halt. Force commanders stood silent in the
streets. They saw the power, and understood. This was a power which vexed them
throughout ancient history, a power which far surpassed their own intrinsic strength, a
power which they could not harness themselves. Some cursed, some ordered charges.
Those that advanced only guaranteed the obliteration of their own warriors as Enin's spell
came to full fruition.
Two glowing spheres of white circled Enin about his whole body. They erupted to the
sky like plumes of smoke from a volcano. The circles of pure magical energy found a
place over Burbon's heart, low in the sky. They merged. They flared. A midnight sun.
Daylight came to this town before sunrise and the dwarves covered their faces in pain.
A second blast of power emerged from the human wizard. This one shot forward. It hit
the ground at the feet of the invaders. The ground crumbled like powdered sugar in a
windstorm. Dwarves fell in panic and confusion, still shielding their eyes from the
blinding light overhead.
Holli ordered an immediate attack. Everyone fired, everyone at once. They fired over
and over without a thought to conserving ammunition. Arrows and stones fell upon the
dwarves from all directions.
Dwarf force commanders ordered a retreat, but their warriors were blind and
disoriented, many unconscious.
Sy brought his soldiers to a wedge. They stormed the closest group of enemies. Poison
tipped spears guaranteed swift death to those dwarves that survived the barrage of
projectiles from above. A fierce cry of victory erupted as the humans felt the tide of battle
sway decidedly to their side.
In this swell of emotion, the captain advanced his forces further, determined to take
back more territory. Confidence renewed, the soldiers responded with ferocity. Block by
block the soldiers moved forward, smashing the remains of the broken dwarf formations.
No longer caring about creating diversions, the ground forces eagerly moved into direct
and full engagement with the enemy, an enemy that could no longer use its great strength.
Blinded dwarves at the forefront of the assault had little chance. Reinforcements were
trapped in half destroyed tunnels. They could not see, their strength meant nothing, and
the human soldiers fell upon them like hungry jackals. They tried to retreat and regroup,
but they moved slowly and without clear vision. Each attempt at escape normally met
with disaster as Sy's ground forces began to move with swift vengeance.
The dwarves at the rear could do little in support. The blinding light burning overhead
hampered their ability to offer reinforcements. They struggled to maintain lines of supply
and support, but they failed in the face of Enin's spells. The display of such powerful
magic crippled dwarf morale, sent them seeking refuge. The force commanders attempted
to rally their warriors, but failed as dwarf soldiers worried as to what other spells might
break their own forces.
Voth witnessed this turn of events with frustration. He lacked the knowledge and
experience to cope with such a counter-attack. His forces were being decimated as the
infernal light gave a distinct advantage to the humans. He looked to the eastern night sky
with even greater dismay. A faint glow of orange beckoned his fears. Sunrise was near,
and it would add to his problems. The wizard could cancel his own spell of light once the
natural sun rose. He could then turn his powerful magic to other responses. The War Com
looked to his retreating warriors, they had already suffered casualties mounting in the
thousands. A staggering number. His force was down to less than a third of its original
size. If he allowed this battle to continue, he risked total annihilation. Reluctantly,
bitterly, he ordered full retreat.
The dwarves took to what was left of their tunnels. Retreat was as unceremonious as
expected. Dwarf warriors dropped sullenly into the ground. As the last warriors fled, they
did not even take the time to collapse the openings.
Once more the humans cheered.
With the dwarf threat evaporated, Enin ended his spell just as the first fiery edge of the
sun appeared over the eastern horizon. He did not collapse in exhaustion. He merely
stood still, tired and weak, watching the celebration of his victorious neighbors.
Sy ordered an immediate search of the town. The wounded, both dwarf and human,
were quickly taken to makeshift hospitals for care. Any straggling invaders were not
pursued or taken prisoner, they were allowed to leave through the tunnels. Sy had no
desire to spark further animosity.
As the last traces of the enemy force dissolved, Sy looked over the carnage. Over a
quarter of his town was in ruins. The dead of both sides draped the streets. He was on the
side of victory, but he could not find it within himself to celebrate.
Holli took to his side as he wandered through the streets.
Sy acknowledged her with praise. "I have to thank you. You did a marvelous job. If
we were on our own, I don't think we would have made it."
"I don't know," Holli responded thoughtfully. "It was your wizard that truly won this
battle and it is because of your wizard that I doubt the dwarves will come back."
"You think this was it, we won't have to go through this again?"
Holli looked far to the west before replying. Large sections of the wall which once
encircled Burbon were now nothing more than rubble. Nothing blocked her view of the
edge of Dark Spruce. She thought of her camp, she thought of Petiole, and she thought of
Ryson.
"Ryson has had time to speak to Yave. He has either failed to convince her or he has
succeeded. If he has succeeded, there will be no more attacks. If he has failed, Petiole
will drop the shadow trees in but three days. The dwarves will not be able to regroup in
that time. Even if they did, I doubt they would want to face the wizard which they now
know protects this place. No, they will not be back."
"What do you think happened to Ryson?" Sy asked hopefully.
"I do not know. I can only suppose he is doing his best to get his sword in the hands of
the dwarf queen. If he can succeed in that, I believe we will all see an end to this war. If
he does not, I doubt he will be as lucky as we were tonight."
Again, Sy looked to the destruction of his town. He saw the motionless corpses.
"Damn."

Sazar strolled through the clearing toward Burbon with confidence. He watched the
previous night’s battle from the hills. He received many reports from goblin scouts. He
knew the dwarves were forced to retreat, he knew the casualties they suffered.
He also knew the humans were tired, probably incapable of fighting off another
assault. He knew of the powerful wizard, but he understood magic and how it would take
time for the magic caster to regain enough energy to return to a true threat. He knew of
the great damage to the wall, and as this allowed him clear sight of Burbon's streets, the
destruction of so many buildings offered him little surprise. Indeed, he knew much, and
he knew the great opportunity which awaited him.
It was not Burbon that enticed him. Though his forces could easily defeat the remnant
forces of the human guard, his greed centered upon more worthy riches. His snake-like
eyes gleamed like the treasures that waited within Dunop; light gems, diamonds, gold.
His scaly tail swished with delight at the thought of such wealth.
It would be easy. He would need only a platoon of goblins and his shag. The shag
would overpower any dwarf sentinels and the goblins would quickly collect the treasures.
Any other resistance from the dwarves would be token at best. The fight of their warriors
had been shattered by the power of the wizard. There was little left of their pride, and
probably less of their desire to fight. All he needed now was to follow the weakened
force back to its home. His mind focused upon the new tunnels dug by the dwarves. He
wanted access to them. His own captured tunnel led from Burbon to the hills, but these
new tunnels, they led directly to the dwarf underground city. Of course, he could have
used his smaller tunnel to access this new passage, but his shag would exhaust itself in
digging to make the connection. He did not wish to waste the time or his shag's energy,
especially when a better alternative waited within Burbon itself. Besides, he wished to
keep his own tunnel a secret. It might be needed in the future.
Defiance blazed in his eyes as he glared at the battered, tired guards that stood in the
rubble of Burbon's western gate. He was unarmed. He was alone. The hills were at his
back as he stepped over open ground. He was surely an inviting target for one of the
guard's spears, but he did not fear such an attack.
The guards watched the serp with equal amounts of suspicion and fatigue. No goblins
escorted the creature. There was no sight of a raiding party or a shag bodyguard. Still, the
soldiers knew of the serp's reputation. Though they stood in near exhaustion, an entire
night without sleep and facing the dwarves in battle, they knew they could not lower their
watch against the approaching serp.
Sazar stepped up to the guards as if he were approaching simple ticket handlers at a
sideshow. He spoke with disregard to their importance.
"I wish to speak to the captain of your guard."
One guard exhaled heavily before responding. "What do you want?"
"I just told you what I want," the serp replied with impatience.
"So what? You think you can walk up and speak to the captain? Give me a reason
why I shouldn't run you through right now."
The serp scowled. "If you kill me, there will be no one to control the hoard of goblins
that stands ready to attack."
The threat forced the guard to retreat from his aggressive stance. He looked to one of
his partners. "Go get Sy."
With a weary nod, the other guard accepted the task and jogged off in a tired gait. The
first guard kept a close eye on the serp even as he felt the heavy drag of exhaustion on his
bones. He was quite happy to see his partner return with Sy in attendance.
Sy nodded at the guard before placing his focus squarely on the serp. Though fatigue
hung on his spirit as well, the captain appeared fresh and aware.
"I'm Sy Fenden. I'm the captain of the guard. What do you want?"
Sazar did not waste time explaining his desires. "I want access to the tunnels used by
the dwarves. I wish to follow them with a force of my own."
"Excuse me?"
Sazar sighed. Dealing with humans was extremely tiresome. "I want access to the
tunnels used by the dwarves. I want to pursue them to their home city. Is that so hard to
understand?"
"Yes, it is," Sy said angrily. "What are you going to do?"
"That is not your business."
"So you just want me to let you walk through town until you find one of their tunnel
entrances, and then, you'll just be leaving?"
"Not just me. I will bring one shag and several goblins with me."
Sy's face turned to stone. "Forget it." He turned to the guards. "Take him prisoner.
He's caused us enough trouble over the last season. This is it for him."
The words of the captain were unwelcome, but not unexpected. Sazar enlightened
him. "I wouldn't do that. An entire army of goblins waits beyond those hills. They wait
and they watch us, even now. If you take me, they already have their orders. They will
attack immediately."
Sy fought off the concern which he felt rising in his midsection. "How many goblins?"
"Do you think I will tell you?"
"It's probably just a small raiding party," Sy shot back.
"I am the serp who has taken control of a shag's mind. How many goblins do you
think I might then also be able to control? Ponder that while you also consider the current
status of your own town. There is little left of your wall. Your western towers have been
leveled. Your men are tired. They are not prepared to face another full assault, especially
one consisting of crossbow fire. Do you have many archers left in position? Do they have
many arrows remaining? I think not."
"We were able to defeat the dwarves. We can stop you," Sy growled.
"Yes, yes, the dwarves. Give my congratulations to your wizard for that powerful
display of his. Quite impressive. Creating a ball of fire, daylight before sunrise, quite a
powerful spell. And a force blast on top of it. Indeed powerful. I give him his due. Of
course, I'm sure he's not prepared for another such spell. I'm sure he's quite tired."
"We're all tired, but we'll fight you if we have to."
"But you don't have to," Sazar noted. "Listen and listen well. I want supplies for the
dormant season. I could take them from you. Your forces are out of position, and your
defenses are crushed. It would take little effort to break through the clearing on this day.
Once we reach the rubble that is left of your town, how would you fight us? My goblins
are small. They could use the broken remains as cover. They can hide in every crevice
and fire at will. The thing is, I don't want anything from you beyond access to the tunnels.
The dwarves have what I want. I wish to follow them now. I will take a raiding party of
goblins with me, as well as my shag. I do not wish to be stopped or questioned. I will also
need safe passage when we return. Again, I expect that I won't have to answer to you."
Sy grimaced. He did not wish to give the serp what he wanted.
Sazar acknowledged the glint of defiance, challenged the captain with his own
understanding of the situation.
"Do not misunderstand what I offer. I do not offer any kind of alliance. We will not
become fast friends. We are on different sides. That will always be the way. I assume
after you rebuild your town and regain your strength, we will again become hard
adversaries. But right now you have something I want. I also offer something you direly
need, a respite. I can hold off any attack against you. By now, you must realize that I
have been behind the many goblin raids against your town."
"Raids that have consistently failed," Sy interjected with a steel, proud tone.
Sazar scoffed. His snake-like eyes peered deeply into the captain’s face. His own
voice grew colder, harsher. "That is when you had a wall and well rested guards. At this
moment, you have neither. Let me ask you again, how would you stop a full-fledged
goblin assault at this moment? My forces can move in the day as easily as in the night. I
have a shag at my disposal. I would lose goblins, I do not deny that, but what would be
my reward? I could own this town. Take the tunnels by force. You can not afford to fight
me now. Admit it. The plain truth is so simple. You would have survived the dwarf attack
only to be decimated by an army of goblins. Everything you own would be mine."
Sazar held up a clawed hand to hold any rebuttal until he was finished. "We have
diverged from my true point. I do not want to attack you this day. The reward would not
be worth the effort, especially when a more profitable bounty waits at the end of the
dwarf tunnels. That is what I will have this day, with or without your acceptance. The
question for you is simple. Will you make me take the tunnels by force, or will you
accept my proposal for a temporary truce?"
Sazar allowed a knowing smile before continuing. "Perhaps you should consult with
your elf friend. Oh, do not act surprised. I know there is a contingent of elves here, allies
in your battle against the dwarves. I also know that they are just as tired and out of
position. Elves like to fight from elevated positions. Look around at the crumbled
buildings and at the shattered wall. Where will the elf archers perch themselves? There
are no rooftops left in this section of town. The dwarves saw to that."
Sy turned from the serp. He looked far into the hills. He tried to guess how many
goblins might be hiding out of his sight. He thought of his soldiers. He didn't believe they
could survive another attack. Still, the thought of offering assistance to this abominable
creature gave him pause.
"I don't think I can help you," he said almost despondently.
"Then you invite attack."
Sy rubbed the back of his neck. Fatigue clouded his thoughts. "What other choice do I
have?"
"You can accept the inevitable."
"Maybe I can't. The thought of helping you makes me sick."
"Do not be so stubborn, human. Do not think of it as helping me. Think of it as
protecting those that live in this town. Is that not your responsibility? You are not helping
me; you are simply giving me passage. That is all I want from you. Don't be foolish."
"I could take you prisoner, use your worthless life to bargain for time," Sy shot back
suddenly.
The serp did not hesitate for a moment. "Then do so. Do so right now. Lead me away
from this spot. As you do, watch the hills. My goblins will rise over them before I move
more than three steps."
"Maybe not. If I threaten your life, they might stay back."
Sazar laughed, a deep hearty laugh. It surprised Sy.
"What's so damn funny?"
"You give the goblins more credit that they deserve. Do you think they can act on
their own? They have their orders. They will follow these blindly. They would walk into
their own stupid death. They are as dim-witted as the rocks around you, but they do not
question my commands. They will attack if you even try to take me hostage. It will
probably mean my death, but it will mean yours as well, and the death of everyone you're
supposed to protect."
The serps eyes sparkled. His forked tongue danced with the rhythm of his words.
"Don't you understand why I came here like this? There is only one choice for you. It is
not between giving me what I want or sending me away. It is between giving me what I
want or seeing the complete obliteration of everything around you. I know you won't
have that. You fought too bravely against the dwarves to let it end like that. But that is
why I am here. There is no bargaining, no alternatives. You give me what I want and we
all live. Deny me, and there is death. Death for me, yes, but also death for you, and more
importantly death for the other humans you are sworn to protect. I understand that. Do
you not accept this?"
Sy did not respond.
Sazar did not wait for a reply.
"Good. We finally understand each other. If it leaves a bitter taste in your mouth, I
take pleasure in that."
Sy folded his arms at his chest. "Before you leave, I want more assurance from you.
You say you won't attack if I let you pass, but what happens when you return with
whatever it is you want? I have no idea how long it will take you. You could be back
before noon and then order an attack. My people will still be tired, the wall will still be
down. Seems to me that I really don't have any alternatives at all. You have an
opportunity to attack, you just want to wait until you get your hands on some of dwarf
treasure first."
Sazar responded if offended. "I assure you, I will want nothing from you after I
succeed with my initial quest in Dunop."
"Not good enough. Right now, you want the tunnels, but after you get what you want,
you might not resist attacking us anyway. Now, I'm not foolish enough to believe you
will stand by your word, but I think we can come to a different understanding."
"And what might that be?" Sazar asked with a growing dislike for the human's tone.
"You say you're willing to die right now. I don't believe that. I think you're here alone
only because you know I won't do anything while the threat of your army hangs over my
head. What's more, I think if you get what you want from the dwarves, you'll want to stay
alive that much more. So here's my deal. You come through with your goblins and your
shag. We won't stop you, but when you come back, you stay with us for two days. That
will give us time to rest and rebuild some of our defenses."
"You can't be serious," Sazar said.
"You stay," Sy said firmly. "You and you alone. You can send your shag and your
goblins back, but you remain here. It's very simple. I know that you won't order an attack
if your life is really in danger. I can bet on that."
"And how do I know you'll keep your word."
"I promise," Sy responded with a wry smile.
"No, no. Once you rebuild your wall, you might simply kill me. I can not take that
risk."
"Then go order your attack," Sy said firmly.
"You would sentence the humans of this pathetic town to their death so quickly?"
Sy stood firm. His tone indicated he would not move from this stance. "I'm here to
protect them and I believe I found a way to do just that. We're not safe as long as your
goblins are ready to attack. I can ensure that won't happen if you remain our guest for a
couple of days. You want access to the tunnels, that will be the price. You stay with us
for two days after you return from Dunop, then you can leave. As for your worries about
me keeping my word, I have no reason to break it."
Sazar took one last stab at Sy's fears. "You realize I could simply order an attack now
and take the tunnels without making any bargain."
"You can, but it is a risk. How much time will you lose if you have to fight us? What
if we offer just enough resistance that you miss your opportunity? You wouldn't like that.
And what if we all realize we're fighting for our lives. Maybe we won't be as tired as you
think. And maybe our wizard isn't as tired as you hope. From what I've learned, I know
that dwarves are resistant to magic, but goblins aren't. I bet you aren't either. What if our
wizard has enough power for one last spell, a spell to fry you where you stand? That's
your risk. Do you wish to take that or accept my proposal?"
Sazar frowned. Then, he laughed. "You speak with a sly tongue, human. I honor that.
Though I do not believe you could stop me from taking the tunnels by force, we will have
it your way this day. I will accept your invitation to stay with you when I return. I expect
you will honor our agreement. I will return shortly with my escorts."

Deep in the caves of the sandstone mountain, hundreds of giant statues waited for the
animation of magic. They stood with blank faces in simple lines. One looked much like
the next, the positioning the same for each. They were not created for the purposes of art,
as an expression of someone's creativity, or to convey some meaningful message. They
were tools, tools that would soon hold great power.
The carvings were composed of the same sandstone that surrounded them. The rock
was no where near as hard or as durable as granite, but it was easier to carve. The statues
were given powerful arms as well as sturdy legs by their algor sculptors. They stood in
lifeless, unmoving columns. They stood near the tunnel ways the dwarves used to attack
the algors. It would be the second time this day that an enemy would invade Dunop using
the very tunnels dug by the dwarves themselves.
Groups of algors stood in circles about the giants. They pressed their hands upon the
statues in the same way an algorian healer would tend the wounded. The magic flowed
from them in similar fashion, except it was not intended to heal living flesh. Instead, it
brought life to lifeless rock.
Statues began to act. They moved at first as if waking from a long sleep. They took
small steps, stretching their arms, turning their heads. The cave began to rumble as more
and more of the once immobile sculptures took to their own movements.
The sight was beyond comprehension. Solid rock was turning, twisting, and moving
like any other creature of the land. It defied the very fabric of reality. Objects carved of
sandstone - without muscles, without joints - they walked, they turned, they grabbed and
held. It was a spectacle that perhaps only the algors could witness with such detachment.
The algors, however, were not alone in their appearance of aloofness. Despite the
miraculous power bestowed upon them, the sand giants themselves lacked any true
appreciation for their own spectacular birth. They did not stare in wonder at their own
flexing fingers. They did not look to each other with amazement. They did not even draw
a connection between their own bodies and the abundance of lifeless rock that surrounded
them. They appeared as if their awakening was nothing of any magnitude.
If anything, the deficit of expression was almost frightening. As there was no
curiosity, no substance of emotion, there was proof that this was not truly life, but simply
the animation of rock. At that moment, their limited consciousness was almost
completely blank. They had no purpose, no direction, no will and no desire. Though they
had the capacity for each, at the moment of animation their awareness was limited to the
fact that they could now move. Further awareness would be pressed upon them by the
algors.
As the sand giants now stirred about like dullards, they awaited their instructions, the
command from their creators that would give them purpose. They remained harmless for
the moment. There was no intrinsic thought of malice or destruction. They would only
become the terrible weapons of war after the algors instructed them to be so.
The algors that survived the dwarf attack now clustered about the animated giants.
They waited for the very last statue to drink the energy of their hands. They had
exhausted every spark of magic that had taken many days and great effort to collect. As
the algors do not store magic without great concentration, the labor had left them weary.
Many would collapse even now had they not been so determined to carry out their own
act of vengeance.
The memory of their dead haunted them. No other race could understand the hold of
their community. Though through some twisted fate of nature they each craved
individualism, they all belonged together. They can speak in unison, think as one. They
can share thoughts, dream together. As much as they wish to be apart, they are all
connected. No matter how far a single algor will travel out into the lonely desert, the
hopes of this individual will always remain a part of the community.
It is only in this light that the severity of the dwarf attack could be understood. As
hundreds of algor lives were vanquished in that moment of battle, the torturous pain was
magnified for their community. The community felt the death of each individual. The
survivors were not untouched, not at the moment of loss and not afterward. They shared
the pain of the dwarf strikes during battle, and they shared the grief and despair when the
battle had ended. Each loss equated to the removal of a family member to the whole.
Each surviving algor felt the pain for each lost. There were no faceless, unknown victims.
There was no detachment. Thus, the grief for each algor was multiplied many hundreds
of times over.
It was with this pain that the algors now spoke, and they shouted out their grief in one
chorus. The chant rang through the cave in simultaneous harmony. They spoke with pride
as well as pain, and they gave their orders to the sand giants with honor to their own
dead.
"You shall follow these tunnels to the dwarf city. You will attack them. You will
continue your assault until the dwarf threat against us has ended. You will remain in the
tunnels and in the dwarf city. You will guard against any other threat against us. You will
do this to the last ounce of power within your stone bodies. You will do this for the dead,
for our brothers and sisters."
The sand giants made only one simple acknowledgment of the orders that would now
dictate the rest of their existence. They turned to the tunnels and began to descend into
the darkness. The command of the algors was now their sole drive. It could not be
changed, it could not be reversed. They would seek out the dwarves and attack until they
could find no more, or until they themselves were destroyed. Even the algors themselves
could no longer revoke this command.
With purpose now driving them, the sand giants moved with greater ferocity. They
pushed through the tunnels like thunder rolling across the sky. They ran into obstacles,
cave-ins rigged by the dwarves and granite blocks stronger than their own sandstone
bodies. They simply pushed on through falling stone and soil or dug around any obstacles
they could not break or crush. The sentinels marched through the caverns with an image
of the enemy that the algors had implanted in their limited awareness. They moved
forward with the chant of the algors ever echoing in what served as their consciousness.

Petiole kicked a long staff that leaned against a tree. The thick, polished branch turned
over twice before bouncing off another tree and rolling to a slow stop. He didn't like
staffs. They reminded him too much of Mappel.
Mappel always held that blasted staff of his, always walked about thumping the end
on the ground. That staff was a third leg for that feeble old elf.
An image of the now legendary leader painted itself in Petiole's mind. This image,
however, was far from feeble. He saw Mappel on Sanctum Mountain, helping to defeat
Ingar and his sphere, giving his life so that every other elf could live. Of course, he was
sure that Mappel held to that annoying staff even to his last.
Petiole had considered the symbolism of the staff before. In times of greater weakness,
times of greater uncertainty, he thought of taking up a staff of his own. He wondered if he
might garner greater respect had he taken up this symbol of leadership. As much as his
own insecurities led him to consider holding a staff, the same inadequacies always forced
him to decline.
If he started walking around with one, the elves of his camp might think he was trying
to imitate his predecessor. He could not have that. He'd rather clutch his hands nervously
than do anything which might conjure up a memory of the previous camp elder. Now,
instead of leaning securely upon a supportive staff, he shuffled about in small, zigzagging
paths that always led him back to the same spot. He mumbled as he clutched his hands
nervously.
Two other elves watched him with pointed attention. Tuber Berisom wanted an
answer to his harvesting requests. Should he begin sending out elves into the forest or
should they wait for Lief and Ryson to return?
The other elf, the guard commander that insisted on mounting an attack on Dunop,
also had demands.
"It is time we acknowledged the threat these dwarves present to us," the commander
snapped. "We invite disaster by waiting any further."
"We have yet to hear from Lief or Ryson," Tuber noted.
"I doubt they will ever return," the commander said with a continued air of frustration.
"They have been gone too long. They have undoubtedly failed in their mission. They
have convinced the dwarves of nothing and we still face great danger."
"We can not be sure of that," Tuber denounced.
"Of course we can," the guard commander continued to argue. "How long would it
take for them to reach Yave and carry out their plan, a plan I doubted the first I heard of
it? It was well-intentioned I admit, but it was destined to fail from the start. The dwarves
are stubborn. They will attack us again."
"They can be convinced. The sword of the delver is powerful."
The commander shook his head strenuously. "You are far too liberal with your faith.
The sword may be able to do much in the hands of an elf or even a delver, but we are
talking about dwarves."
"They may yet be convinced," Tuber maintained his hope. "Even now the dwarves
may have conceded their mistakes."
"Are you suggesting the dwarves may no longer be interested in war? We have a
report that a massive dwarf army attacked the humans at Burbon just last night," the
commander countered.
"They were defeated," Tuber reminded. "They suffered great casualties."
"That is why we must attack now. They are weakened. It is time to exact revenge for
the elves that died in their attack against us."
"And now the dwarves have their own dead. Our elves were also at Burbon. Holli
joined in the lead of the defense. Surely that is revenge enough for you."
"From what I hear, it was the human wizard which defeated the dwarves. We now
have sorcerers of our own. Let us allow them to cast their spells within the very caves of
Dunop. Let the dwarves know that they must fear us as well."
Tuber would not be bullied by such sentiment. "This is a pointless argument. Petiole
decided to give Lief and the delver the opportunity to convince Yave of her mistakes. If
they failed, he would drop the shadow seeds. There was never a discussion of sending elf
sorcerers into Dunop."
"Maybe there should have been."
Petiole finally spoke loud enough to be heard. "I agree the dwarves are a danger to
us."
"We do not know how Lief fared with Yave," Tuber reminded as he faced the camp
elder.
"We know. He has not returned."
"He has not had the full time you gave him," Tuber persisted.
Petiole's face began to turn crimson. "What would take him so long? Certainly, he
must have been brought before Yave by now. Why would he stay?"
"He wouldn't," the commander chimed.
Petiole found confidence in tone. "It is like he said, the dwarves attacked Burbon after
Lief and the delver entered the cave to Dunop. They have not returned, they must have
failed."
"Finally, some sense," the commander grunted with disrespect.
Petiole exploded with rage. "I never wanted to wait! This was not my idea. I would
have dropped the seeds days ago. It was only at Lief's demand I withheld. Do not accuse
me of not having any sense in this matter! It is you that has no sense! What would you do
now? Enter the cave with a few elf magic casters? You would be slaughtered. It was my
idea to use the seeds against the dwarves. That is the only thing which will make them
understand our true power over them. Then, and only then, will we be safe."
The commander glared. "Then drop the seeds. If not, give me the order to attack. One
way or the other, it is time we made a decision. I leave you to make it."
The commander stepped away, appearing to inspect some other part of the forest.
Tuber ignored him. He placed his full attention upon Petiole. "You can not allow him
to attack Dunop. We will lose the best of our magic casters in such a short-sighted
attack."
"I have no intention of letting him lead any attack," Petiole said. "The only order I will
give him is to seal the known entrance to Dunop to the best of his ability."
"If you do that, Lief will be unable to return."
"He is not returning. He is probably already dead."
"You can't be sure of that," Tuber denounced.
"I can. Anyway, it no longer matters. I am dropping the seeds without further delay. I
have already asked for guards to seek Dunop's many air shafts. They have found several.
We will drop the seeds this morning."

Sy watched the goblins and shag descend down the shaft. He had many of his men in
defensive positions, not that they were in any state to truly fight. It burned him to see the
serp get his way.
When the creatures dropped out of sight, he was more than half-tempted to collapse
the tunnel. He knew the serp would not keep his word. He decided against it only to keep
the serp from knowing of his mistrust. He would not, however, fail in taking other
precautions.
He looked to two of his men. "I know you're both tired, but I want you to watch that
hole. If anything comes out, sound an alarm. It'll just be for a while. I'll have you relieved
well before sunset." He then turned to his other guards. "Rest up. We may have another
fight on our hands later today. I want us to be prepared."
Holli walked up to the captain as if she had rested all night. "I agree with your mistrust
of the serp. The elves at my command will stay for a few more days. We will remain at
your service until you can rebuild your defenses."
"I appreciate that."
"We will do what we can, but I believe your most powerful advantage will be to get
your wizard well-rested. Goblins are not resistant to magic, and Enin has the power to
destroy many of them."
"I'm glad to here you say that. I'm sure Enin will be even happier. He wants you to
trust him."
"I believe the wizard knows my feelings. I don't know if anyone could hide them from
him now."
"Yeah, well, I ordered him to get some sleep."
A single guard ran furiously to the captain and the elf. She was half out of breath and
half captivated by shock.
"Sir, coming in from the north. I don't know what it is. It's unbelievable. Giants, about
a dozen of them, maybe more."
Fatigue hung on Sy's words. "Godson, what now. Shags?"
The guard shook her head vigorously. "No, bigger!"
Sy looked to Holli. The elf had no explanation.

"Another retreat?!" Anger and frustration painted Yave's face. The sight of Voth
sickened her. She paced about the throne room, stomping about in a tirade. She shook
with tension. "What are you telling me? Are you telling me that the humans beat us
again? Not only beat us, but humiliated us?"
Voth Stonepillar now regretted being selected the new War Com. He lacked Strog's
confidence. He spit out excuses hoping to quell the tide of Yave's anger. "They allied
with the elves. There were archers everywhere. They were ready for us. Every time we
got to the surface, we faced another ambush."
The War Com ground his teeth together. His own words fanned a distaste within
himself. The humans had beaten him, outmaneuvered him, out-planned and outlasted
him; they had indeed humiliated him. He searched for his own redemption as he sought
the words to calm the queen. "We were not prepared for this. We were not ready, I see
that now. The humans are weak, but they were well-organized. The elves’ doing. That is
the explanation."
The attempt rang hollow. Yave glared.
The thickening tension pressed upon the new War Com. He scrambled for a way out.
"That's not really what I mean, not all of it. That's why we had difficulty at first, but we
overcame that. Even with the odds against us, we rose above our inferior enemy. We
suffered against every break, yet we still had victory in our grasp. Despite the human’s
preparation, despite the help of the elves, we began to take the town. We brought down
their wall, crushed their structures. To get that far was proof of our superiority. We
overcame everything, we had the battle won."
"Then what happened?" Yave demanded.
"A light in the sky, brighter than the sun. A wizard cast a spell of light so powerful I
could not believe it. He created daylight during the dark. Not just daylight, light that
blinds. We could not fight that. He did not stop there. He broke the ground beneath us.
He casts with white light. White light! He has great control over fire, light and earth. I tell
you, we had the battle won until the wizard intervened."
Yave was tired of hearing this excuse. There were few spells that could harm them
directly, and no living wizard could have attained that level of sorcery so soon after the
destruction of the sphere. She hammered at her War Com. "Are you telling me you could
not hold your gains until the wizard tired?"
Voth turned to another excuse. "We did not have enough time. Even if we outlasted
the wizard's spell, the true sun was coming up. Without proper goggles, we would have
been fighting blind."
"Why I am surrounded by incompetence?" Yave bellowed.
"What? What else could I have done?"
Yave's eye twitched uncontrollably. Her thick palm struck the new War Com across
the chin. "Don't you question me! I put you in command of our forces. You are the War
Com! It is your duty to determine the strategies needed to win."
Voth was now gaining a true appreciation for Strog's struggles with this queen. He
wished to be anywhere else than in this room.
Yave continued her rant. "I have heard reports of your attack. This goes beyond a
wizard and the rising of the sun. You lost well over half of your force and still Burbon is
in the hands of the humans. For some reason, the humans suffered only minor casualties.
How could you lose so many compared to their few?"
"It was the wizard ..."
"Idiot! Your casualties mounted before the wizard cast his spell! You are not fit to be
a War Com. You are not fit to be a general. I would almost bite my own tongue to say it,
but I wish Strog was here."
"So do I," Voth mumbled.
The queen was about to strike the War Com again, this time with a closed fist, but a
breathless dwarf sentry broke into the room.
"How dare you enter ..." Yave began.
It was Yave's turn to be interrupted. The sentry barked out his disturbing news to both
queen and War Com. "We are under attack! Sand giants are breaking through into our
southern tunnels. They have passed through every measure of defense. They are already
in the streets! The sentries have been overpowered. We need warriors."
Voth cursed. "The bulk of what's left of our army is resting in the eastern barracks."
"Recall them!" Yave shouted.
Voth ran from the room with another curse. Though he wished to be free from Yave's
presence, he did not need this. He stumbled out into the palace corridor shaking his head.
The sentry followed as the queen was left to ponder the news alone.
She glared at the open door used by the departing War Com. Her heart beat with a
thick, dull thud against her chest. Sand giants - the algors. The words burned her with
memories of Tun. She forgot about Burbon, about the humans and the failure of her
warriors. The toad-like creatures in the desert dominated her emotions which turned from
hot to cold.
Sand giants in Dunop. The same creatures that killed her son. She wished to see them.
She marched with malicious determination to a palace balcony. A smoothed stone
platform welcomed her. She leaned over a black rock railing. A dazzling view of Dunop's
closest streets opened for her inspection. The clamor to the south seized her attention.
The sand giants were easily spotted. Their golden color contrasted with the dark grey
of Dunop's rock streets and structures. The invaders were monumental in size and they
towered over every dwarf that came into their path. Their strength was equal to their
stature as they broke through loose dirt and rock with the same ease as dwarf diggers.
They left a trail of dust in their wake as they marched toward the palace.
Dwarf sentries fought valiantly. Their mighty weapons ground the legs of the sand
giants into dust, but for the moment, they were hopelessly outnumbered. Caught by
surprise, and with no sight of reinforcements, they failed to regroup. They fought in
haphazard clusters, hoping to hold a position, but the gates were lost and the invaders
swarmed through like rushing water.
The sand giants moved forward with frightening efficiency. They decimated the dwarf
resistance. They quickly overran all dwarf sentries that dared to block their path. They
spread through the dimly lit alleys like a plague. They took no prisoners, and though no
dwarf would beg for mercy, such a request would have been beyond these single-minded
heralds of destruction.
Unarmed dwarf civilians fled in terror, but most could not outrun their pursuers. The
algor creations were by no means fast, but their stride more than tripled the equally slow
dwarves. They captured and killed many; they held no regard for differences among the
dwarves. They hunted them all.
Yave's hate for the algors was fanned by this spectacle. She thought of Tun, how he
perished at the hands of these creatures. The Sword of Decree had bestowed that vision
upon her. Now, it was being recreated in her own kingdom. She spat venomous curses at
the sand giants as they progressed toward the open spaces of the city center.
Voth finally appeared with formations of dwarf warriors, but even to the eternally
optimistic, all hope was already lost. Voth's warriors were fatigued, battle weary. They
barely held the strength to maintain their lines. They moved up to meet their foes like
sheep ready to be fleeced.
The sand giants, however, attacked with no regard to morale. Such an attribute held no
meaning for such creatures. They did not tire, they did not face the ever-swelling
emotions of battle. They had but one purpose. They thought not of self-preservation, they
did not think of their fallen comrades. They simply moved forward with the orders of the
algors pressing their every action. Even as one sand giant fell, another stepped up to
crush four or five dwarf defenders.
The algor creations quickly took the center cavern of Dunop. They surrounded the
palace, and spread out to meet advancing dwarf attackers. In these larger caverns, their
advantage was magnified. Without the restrictions of tight dwarf tunnels, the gargantuan
invaders used the full force of their power. Despite the courage of dwarf warriors that
bordered on fanatical, despite the resolve which burned within them to protect their
home, the sand giants began to remove all that was left of the dwarf army.
Fury froze Yave in place. She stood upon her palace balcony with pure hate seething
through her veins. She watched as the death of her own son was recreated several times
over. She could barely breathe. Her chest was tight with anguish. Dwarf after dwarf was
taken by the sand giants, crushed like old newspaper, and then tossed aside; killed just
like her Tun.
The invaders cared little for Yave's thoughts. They cared little for the display of death
which surrounded them. If they were labeled as monsters, it did not matter. If the dwarves
suffered pain, it did not matter. What mattered was the simple existence of these dwarves.
They were the threat to the algors, and this threat would be exterminated; completely,
permanently.
The giants moved to the palace entrance. They sensed the importance of this edifice,
the underground hive that held the queen. They would have this place. They were met by
the final force of the dwarf army. The carnage defied sanity.
Dwarves were thrown against the stone structure. Their bodies crumbled, bones
shattered into powder. Those that did not die instantly, shrieked in agony.
The sand giants ignored each death cry.
Yave bent over the railing to watch the inevitable conclusion. The last soldier was torn
apart as several of the monsters grabbed for him at once. Voth.
Yave felt not true loss for her most recent War Com. She felt only hate, hate for the
very creatures that now had unobstructed passage to her palace, and hate for the algors
that created them. She pulled a halberd from the wall.
"It is better this way. Let them come," she snarled.
She took one last glimpse over the balcony ledge to count the first handful to enter.
Another surprise – a large raiding party of goblins. She shouted more curses.
A serp in the throng seemed to stare back at her, appeared to grin.
"Parasites! Rodents!" Yave bellowed. Her hate, born of the sand giants, was now
intensified by the sight of a goblin raiding party.
Sazar did not return her insults. He only waved, a sarcastic act of cowardice.
The shag at his side had previously dispatched the sentries left to guard the battle
tunnels leading to and from Burbon. When he reached the streets of Dunop, Sazar had
sensed the commotion, noted the lack of resistance by the dwarves. As he spied the sand
giants, he understood his fortune. All dwarf opposition had faded to the power of the
algor creations, and thus, his progress through the city was unimpeded. He smiled upon
his own luck.
With such upheaval, there was no need for diversions, no need to sacrifice any of his
goblins. They could all be used as treasure bearers. More, the path to the very palace was
now open. He nearly giggled with anticipation.
The sand giants posed no threat to him or his goblins. They focused solely upon the
dwarves. It was like having an independent army of great strength at his own disposal,
and the serp used such an advantage with great skill.
"Stay behind the giants," he ordered his minions. "Let them take on the palace guards.
No need for us to take risks. Take your time. We have little to worry about, and much to
gain. It seems all the dwarves will soon be dead. I believe that before this day is done, we
will have this whole city to ransack."
Sazar brought up the rear of the sand giant advance. He guided his goblins into the
palace only after the passage was cleared of all defenders. He dispassionately watched the
death of each palace guard. With the corridors free for pillaging, he ordered the search of
every room. The bounty was unimaginable. Diamonds, rubies, jewel encrusted objects of
all kind fell into their sacks. Gold was there for the taking. Sazar marveled at the riches
which would soon be his to spend on whatever he desired. His greed pressed him further
through the palace. He took everything of value that his goblins could carry. He began
pulling light gems from the very walls. The corridors grew dark, but such creatures had
no aversion to the lack of light.
One last time, he blessed the sand giants as they wrought destruction over the dwarves
that would have previously prevented such a windfall. He considered their creators. Sand
giants were known to be the work of the algors. He thought of the algors and how they fit
into this great conflict. He wondered what might have caused them to send this force to
assault Dunop. He reveled in this expansion of hostilities. The humans, the elves, the
algors; they were all at war with the dwarves. They would all leave him an opportunity
for greater riches. Today, he would have Dunop.
He would also have Burbon. He would not honor his bargain with the human captain.
Why should he? He could exit with his treasure now at any point. He did not have to
return to Burbon. He could surface in the hills beyond the reach of the captain and his
men. He could assemble his forces, entice mercenaries with his new wealth, and attack
Burbon after nightfall. He could take their supplies as well. Two cities would be his to
ravage. Burbon and Dunop. What a great time to be a serp of such power. This is why
war was music to his ears.
Yave held the halberd with loose anticipation. She stood firmly on the balcony. A
dead end. The abominations would have only one course to reach her. They would have
to step forward to take hold of her. She would crush them one at a time. She did not care
how long it would take, did not care how many she had to destroy. If necessary, she
would leave a mountain of lifeless sandstone before her. In truth, she prayed it would
come to that.
“Let them all come.”
In the course of her resolve, she saw shadows ahead of her, heard the rumbling of
heavy footfalls. She thought of Tun. She would have her revenge.
Her expression fell blank. The hate dissolved. The anger faded. She became as singleminded as the creatures she intended to destroy. Her emotions accepted this moment as
vindication for the memories that haunted her. She would cleanse Dunop of these
monstrosities, she would single-handedly defeat the army of the algors.
Lights faded, more gems stolen. She didn't care. She would fight in pure darkness, if
need be. After all, she was a dwarf. She could see in the dark as well as a shag.
She stood ready for her battle of personal redemption when one last distraction caught
her attention. Echoing reverberations thundered through the streets behind her, a signal of
more upheaval. She considered the prospect of more sand giants.
"Fine. Let more come," she stated coldly, but the fury of this rumble gave her pause.
Something was different. Something was wrong. The rumblings consisted of foreign
sounds, noises like rock battling stone. She turned her head. The source of the upheaval
was plainly evident, undeniable in power.
Cliff behemoths!
They rambled through the streets with majesty. They were larger than life, the thing of
dreams and legends. No individual could deny their grandeur, not even Yave, no matter
how twisted or vengeful. Such was the purity of the behemoths physical appearance, such
was the simplicity of their inner strength.
In this moment, however, the complexity of what they could become shone evident.
They revealed a domination which was theirs for the taking. Their very movement
boasted of power. The intrinsic strength of the surrounding dwarf city was impotent in
comparison to these titans. In no small words, they could become the very hand of
Godson.
Their purpose was clear. They were here not to destroy Dunop, but to save it. They
represented no threat to the dwarves, no threat to real life. Their religion prevented such
acts. The sand giants, however, defied the cliff behemoths religion, defied everything the
cliff behemoths held dear. These atrocities were an abomination to Godson. They were
not bestowed a spirit or a consciousness. They were not gifted life, they were granted
animation. They were rock, and only Godson may bestow life upon the lifelessness.
With this temperament toward the tool of the algors, the cliff behemoths set upon the
sand giants. They attacked. The peaceful nature of their beliefs dissolved in their
intolerance as they crushed the stone creatures with swipes of their mighty arms. They
left a trail of sandy dust in their wake, and they moved forward with the conviction to
eradicate every imposter.
For the first time in their miniscule period of existence, the sand giants displayed
uncertainty. They were here to end the threat of the dwarves. They were not instructed to
attack other creatures, unless they were threats to the algors. The cliff behemoths
displayed a willingness to protect the dwarves and the sand giants found difficulty in
comprehending this action. Their limited instincts left them in a quandary of inactivity.
The cliff behemoths ignored the confused passivity of the sand giants. Massive in size
themselves, the behemoths outmatched the algor creations in power. And just as the sand
giants crushed the dwarves with detachment, the behemoths crushed the sand giants with
disdain.
Yave turned her back upon the sight. She found no relief, no joy in the sight of her
city's saviors. She waited for the sand giants to come for her. They did not. Once more
her hate began to boil. She wanted this moment, wanted to face the sand giants on these
terms. She would never have the opportunity.
The sand giants within the palace sensed the growing threat of the cliff behemoths.
They understood that the newly arrived titans planned to prevent the successful
completion of their mission. The queen within the structure would have to wait as the
behemoths became the primary danger. The algor protectors went back to the streets to
deal with this new menace. They did not return.
Also within the palace, Sazar noticed their departure with growing displeasure. Their
exit left him puzzled. Many palace guards remained at posts throughout this rock castle.
Uneasily, he faced a reexamining of his situation. He stalked the palace corridors quickly
until he found a window to view the unexpected turn. The truth did not please him. To
him, the cliff behemoths were an unwelcome sight.
"Why do they intervene?" he mouthed. "This makes no sense. They are not warring
creatures. They live by peaceful doctrine."
Enlightenment hit him with the severity of a falling rock. "Could it be?" he whispered.
He could not deny the facts before him. The cliff behemoths were not acting as
invaders. He knew such behavior would be beyond them. They were here to save the
dwarf city. The revelation brought an even greater, distasteful realization. Cliff
behemoths would not take up one side or another in this war. They would not act as
aggressors, but only as peacemakers. They would not escalate hostilities. Any such
considerations would be as foreign to them as charity was to him.
His cunning mind understood the complete nature of such actions. Cliff behemoths
would not intervene to simply save one city. Such an act was simply out of character.
They must have viewed the entire struggle as a threat to their religion. Sazar's war was
coming to a quick, judicious end, preempted by beings beyond his manipulative control.
The limitless opportunities once within his grasp, now evaporated like water in a
steaming volcano. There would be no more battles like the one in Burbon, no more
assaults by sand giants that allowed him to enter a dwarf palace. A moment before, it
seemed the riches of his dreams were in his hands. Now, he wondered about his very
safety.
Though the dwarf warriors were decimated, there remained enough dwarf sentries and
civilians to capture his goblins. He would lose the treasure already in his hands. His shag
would fight to prevent his immediate capture, but even this hairy beast might fall to the
strength of angry dwarves looking for vengeance. If he were taken, he would be put to
death.
He examined the treasure already procured for his benefit. It would suffice. He
recalled his goblins.
"To the shadows with you. Maintain hold over what we have taken. We must move
with care. The tide of battle has turned against us. We will find exits in the tunnels, but
we will not return to Burbon. The shag will clear a path for us so that we may return
directly to the hills."
One goblin, unaware or incapable of discerning the significance of the cliff behemoths
and caught in the thrill of their stolen bounty, ventured to question Sazar about his future
endeavors. "Do we now take Burbon?"
Sazar shook his head. "The opportunity is lost. These cliff behemoths have declared
an end to the war. We do not know to what extent they might intervene. To attack the
humans now would risk our substantial gains. No, we will wait for another day."

Heavy footfalls, a pause, and finally, a resounding crash, as if lightning had struck
within a hair's breadth away. The massive stone door crumbled to an ash like substance.
Its destruction created a curtain of gray and black dust that swirled about the broken
edges of the cell entrance.
Ryson did not expect that much power from a sand giant. He wondered as to how
many waited behind the cloud of near microscopic debris. Perhaps as many as four had
struck together, but his sharp eyes seized only the silhouette of a single giant crouched
over nearly in half in the doorway.
Its colossal shape quickly extinguished any thought that this might have been a dwarf
action. Ryson could do nothing else but believe they now faced the threat of the sand
giants coming for Jon. His keen hearing had picked up the sounds of battle, even deep
within this stone prison. Knowing of the algors intentions, he simply assumed the sand
giants were now fulfilling their purpose.
In a heartbeat, he pranced past the giant with a dazzling display of speed and agility.
Once beyond the first sentinel that obliterated the door, he scanned the corridors to assess
the threat. The halls were empty. No other sand giants appeared. No dwarf sentries, dead
or alive. Mystifying. He expected greater signs of a struggle, more sand giants, the
battered bodies of dwarf guards.
His bafflement expanded as his own quick instincts forced him to take a second look
at the giant he had passed. The double-take proved colossal in revelation. This was no
sand giant. Its hide was harder than sandstone, darker in color than the sandy tan, and it
wore a tunic of brown and green.
"Dzeb?" Ryson mouthed in weary disbelief.
"It is good to see you well, Ryson Acumen," the titan responded with a soft voice that
was so uncharacteristic of this mighty being.
"You’re here?! What's going on?" Ryson mumbled trying desperately to reorganize
events in his mind.
"I am here to help, myself and many others. Let us first see to our friends and then I
will explain."
Dzeb left a dazzled and bewildered delver in the corridor as he stepped, or actually
perhaps crawled would be a better description, into the cell. The doorway in its original
form would not have allowed access, but Dzeb pressed through with little care to the tight
fit. The outline of the passage was left much larger after he had passed. Once within the
cell, he had greater room to move, though he remained hunched over so as not to scrape
his head on the stone ceiling. He nodded a greeting to the elf.
"Godson's blessing upon you, Lief Woodson. It is good to see you as well. You are not
hurt, I pray?"
Lief could not hide his smile. "No, I'm fine. You are indeed a welcome sight. We had
expected sand giants."
Dzeb's expression turned cold, but only for an instant. "Those insults to Godson have
been removed. That threat is gone and there is no need to speak of it further."
As if the statement cleared his own pain, Dzeb again beamed with the purity and grace
gifted to the cliff behemoths. "You look much better than when last I saw you. The
poison of the sphere had taken its toll upon you before it was destroyed. I am happy that
you have recovered so thoroughly."
"It did not take much. Just the removal of the sphere. I'm sorry you left before I woke
up. I would have liked the chance to say good-bye."
"Why? We see each other now. Godson has taught us that there is no need for
farewells. We part and we return. That is the way until we are all brought together in His
final judgment."
"That may be so, but I still would have liked to thank you."
"You have done so."
The delver could no longer allow this near idle banter to continue. His mind was froth
with confusion. He expected sand giants. Instead, he now beheld Dzeb; not an
unwelcome sight, but the cliff behemoth had earlier refused his call for help. A hundred
questions circled his every thought, and he jumped into the conversation with unbridled
curiosity as to these passing events.
"What's been happening out there? I've been hearing things, I figured sand giants
were moving through, but now I'm not sure what's going on. You said you removed the
threat. Did the sand giants attack? Was that what I heard?"
Dzeb answered somberly. "Your hearing is as keen as always, my friend. Those
abominable creations had been loose in the city. I am afraid there has been much loss.
Many dwarves have perished." His voice thickened, grew as if his own faith had been
reaffirmed. "But there will be no more loss on this day to those abominations."
"You destroyed them?"
"There were but a few remaining when I entered this palace. I am sure the others have
taken care of them by now."
"How did you know to find us here?"
"The elf guard named Holli told us you might be held in the palace prison. She
requested I see to your release."
Ryson felt his heart skip. "You spoke to Holli? You were in Burbon? What's
happening there? Is everything alright?"
"I have spoken to your friend, Sy Fenden," Dzeb replied. His voice was reassuring,
soft as gentle cotton. "He wished me to give you a message. The town was attacked, there
have been losses, but Burbon has been saved. They fought off the dwarf attack, held the
town of your home. There is need for repair, but they have survived. Also, a woman
named Linda is in fine health."
Ryson twisted with relief as well as agony. He beamed at Linda's name. He found joy
to hear Sy had sent him word, but the thought of losses curbed his jubilation. He blurted
out questions without pause to breath. "What about Enin? How bad was the town
damaged? How did Holli look to you? Was she hurt at all?"
"I do not know of the one called Enin, but the elf named Holli was well when I spoke
to her. I noticed no injury."
Dzeb cut himself off. He turned his head as he gazed deeper into the cave. His eyes
fell upon a slumped figure that showed little sign of life. "Is that Prince Jon Folarok of
the dwarves?"
Lief's voice turned grave. "It is. Actually, it's King Jon Folarok, or it was before his
mother took his throne and threw him down here."
"There is only one throne that is of importance, and that throne belongs to Godson,"
Dzeb reminded gently but firmly.
Lief did not attempt to enter a philosophical or religious debate with the cliff
behemoth.
Ryson spoke up with obvious impatience. Thoughts of Burbon now weighed upon
him. He wished to leave quickly to survey the damage for himself. He quickly advised
Dzeb of Jon's personal torment. "Jon didn't want any throne. Now, he's lost. He just sits
there, clinging to the emptiness. He doesn't react to anything I say anymore. He seems to
have lost the will to live."
"That is a gift too precious to throw away." Dzeb walked determinedly over to the
slumped dwarf. He looked upon Jon with eyes of sorrow. He shook his head slightly.
The dwarf showed no sign of acknowledging the magnificent being that stood before
him. As Ryson had explained, he clung to the shadows of his escape, the darkness of
nothing. Like a clump of partially molded clay, the dwarf sat unmoving with little to
reveal any light of consciousness.
"Do you give up on life?" Dzeb questioned almost sternly.
The dwarf did not respond.
"You wish to waste away? Give up the gift Godson has bestowed upon you?"
Again, silence.
Ryson and Lief watched, wondering what power the cliff behemoth might display,
hoping the force of Dzeb's religion might sway the dwarf back into reality. They waited
for Dzeb to lift the dwarf with mesmerizing words, to raise him with glory filled hands.
Ryson, for the moment, forgot about Burbon. The desire to watch the cliff behemoth
melted his other curiosities. He waited with hope. He would not have been surprised had
the very rock opened overhead to bring down cascading lights of miracle.
Strangely, Dzeb walked away, no other words, no miracle. Jon remained detached
from reality. He made no reaction in the presence of the cliff behemoth, and did not stir at
Dzeb's departure. He remained a shell; breathing, heart beating, eyes open, but unaware
and uncaring for his surroundings.
Ryson's words revealed his own distress. He approached the cliff behemoth with a
plea in his heart. "Can't you help him?"
"I can not," Dzeb replied.
"Can not, or will not?" Ryson pressed.
"There is nothing I can do," Dzeb replied gloomily. "If I could help, I would."
Dzeb's expression sent daggers into Ryson's soul. He nearly groaned at the pain in
Dzeb's words. "I'm sorry. I didn't mean that. It's just that when I asked you to help us stop
Yave, you wouldn't because you wanted a clear sign from Godson. I wondered if you
might be doing the same now."
"Godson gives us all free will to choose," Dzeb stated almost diplomatically. "Jon has
chosen to withdraw."
"So what's going to happen to him?"
"I do not know."
Lief offered the only possible alternative for the moment. "Why don't we try getting
him out of here? Perhaps, if we take him from this miserable cell, it might revive him to
some degree."
"That's a good idea," Ryson chimed. At that moment, the delver felt the pull of many
things. He wanted to survey the damage done to Dunop. He also wondered of Yave's
reaction to the entrance of the cliff behemoths. Questions on each of these counts plagued
him mercilessly. Leaving this dungeon was the first step in gaining knowledge toward all
these mysteries. He motioned to Dzeb. "Can you carry him? I doubt he'll want to move
on his own."
Dzeb simply nodded. He moved back to the dwarf and lifted him gently from the slab.
He carried the dwarf in his arms as if walking with a sleeping puppy.
"Where shall we take him?"
"I guess we should return to the throne room," the delver suggested. "We can retrieve
my sword. I also want you to speak to Yave, if of course you're willing. I'm assuming you
came here to do more than just beat up on sand giants."
"I will speak to the queen," Dzeb said as if there would be no question to this.
Ryson eyed the cliff behemoth with a raised eyebrow. Yet another mystery now
entered his mind, a mystery regarding the cliff behemoths very presence, a mystery
which pushed other curiosities from his mind. Again, he rattled off questions. "Why did
you show up here? When I last spoke to you, you believed you shouldn't get involved.
What made you change your mind? And why did you bring others. If you were so hard to
convince, how was it they were willing?"
Dzeb remained silent. He stood as if the delver had not even questioned him. He
waited for the delver to move forward while all the time holding the dwarf with steady
hands.
The delver assumed he had confused the titan with too many questions at once. He
repeated the simplest, yet broadest, of the queries. "Why did you change your mind and
come to help us?"
The cliff behemoth did not answer.
The delver's curiosity jumped a hundredfold. "Dzeb?"
Still, no answer.
The delver would not move from the cell, his impatience to leave now dissipated in
the face of a new and growing mystery. He pressed for an answer. His delver spirit of
interest mounted with each passing moment of silence. "Well? I didn't think you wanted
to involve yourself in the affairs of others. You said it wasn't your right, that you would
need guidance from Godson. How did he guide you?"
Dzeb still would not reply.
The continued lack of a response pushed Ryson into a fury of inquisitiveness. He
attempted to pull answers from the cliff behemoth by circumventing the original
question. He searched for a question which would at the very least elicit some kind of
verbal reply.
"You came to speak to Yave and stop the war, right?"
"This violence must not continue," Dzeb finally answered.
Ryson pounced on the titan's answer. "You didn't think you should get involved
before, but that's obviously changed. I take it that means you will see this to an end? You
will continue until the war is finally stopped?"
Dzeb nodded patiently. "The dwarves must stop attacking others, and others must
cease their attacks upon the dwarves. This clash began because of false blame, a thirst for
vengeance, and a mountain of misplaced hate. Each opposes the very teachings of
Godson Himself."
"And that's why you finally intervened? Because the war began because of things
which opposed Godson?"
Again, Dzeb did not answer.
Ryson waited only for a moment. When he realized Dzeb would not reply, he quickly
turned to other questions.
"You didn't come alone. You said other cliff behemoths came to help. I can only guess
that they think the violence has to stop as well. Is that true?"
"Yes," Dzeb answered. "Many cliff behemoths understood the need."
"Who said there was a need?"
"You did," Dzeb nodded back to the delver.
Ryson found the reply surprising, but continued to press forward. "But that didn't
work when I first spoke to you. What changed your mind?"
"Maybe it is best you don't know."
Ryson stood aghast. "What?"
Dzeb looked deeply into Ryson, looked with compassion, but with no less conviction
for his own decision. "I understand that being a delver you are naturally inquisitive about
everything. This, however, may be something which should remain a mystery."
Ryson's eyes shot open wide. "You can't be serious?!"
"I am very serious."
Ryson could not have this. He needed to know. He immediately searched for other
alternatives. He blurted one out in hopes of forcing an answer from the cliff behemoth
before him. "I could ask the other cliff behemoths."
"I will ask you not to do that."
"Why?"
"I do not wish you to ask them. It is a delicate matter. I'm asking as a friend that you
honor this request."
The response caged the delver. He groped for a way out. "That doesn't make any
sense."
"Do you decline this request of mine?"
Ryson shook his head with uncertainty. The mere thought of denying Dzeb filled him
with guilt, but he direly wanted to know why the cliff behemoth had changed his mind.
"If you don't want me to ask them, I won't. I owe you that, at the very least. But I don't
understand. Why shouldn't I know this?" The last was nearly a plea for mercy, as if Dzeb
was sentencing the delver to an unfit punishment.
Dzeb paused. He almost frowned as he considered a way to enlighten the delver.
Finally, and after much apparent consternation, he spoke with renewed conviction. "What
would you think if I told you Godson had sent a message to us, instructing us to help
you?"
Ryson took but a moment to consider the question. He answered quickly, hoping to
get to the truth and not play with assumptions. "I don't know. I guess I would think the
war was getting out of hand and that it was time to be stopped. Is that ..."
Dzeb pressed forward. He wanted the delver to truly contemplate such a significant
occurrence. "Think carefully. Do not end with that simple answer. Consider completely
what it might mean if I told you Godson Himself sent a message. Whether you believe in
the word or not, you must consider this carefully. What would that mean to you? What
would be the potential if others thought that way? Every time there would be a conflict
in the future, you would think to rely on some sign from the heavens to tell you when you
have gone too far. That is not the way it should be. All the races of this land must learn to
rely on their own judgment, their own decisions."
Dzeb held up a finger to halt the delver from asking another question. He wanted the
delver to consider the full measure of his point. "Before you speak, let me pose the other
possibility. What would you think if I said Godson did not send a message; if the cliff
behemoths intervened at their own discretion?"
Ryson again answered quickly, hoping to pry the ultimate truth from the cliff
behemoth. "I would be happy to hear it. I wanted you to stop this war, remember?"
"But again, how would you feel about the future? Would you begin to worry about
how else we might involve ourselves in your affairs?"
The question centered upon Ryson's own previous considerations. The possibility of
cliff behemoths intervening at their own discretion might indeed have dire consequences.
Yes, today it stopped a war, it stopped a tragedy. But who was to say how the cliff
behemoths might intrude in other ways? They had the power to rule with absolute
authority, to become dictators. Would that truly be a welcome thought? That
consideration had indeed invaded the delver's thoughts before. He spoke of such thoughts
with the Reader Matthew. Would this truly be a blessing, or a curse?
"I don't know what to say to that," Ryson answered honestly. "I know I'm grateful you
helped today. We needed your help."
"Then let it end with that," Dzeb counseled.
Ryson shifted his weight. That conclusion did not sit well with him. It left a hole in his
being. Without an answer, he was incomplete.
"Perhaps it is time we moved forward," Lief finally intervened. "We gain nothing by
standing here debating philosophical questions."
At first, the delver did not move. He searched for one last question, one last thought
which might shed a new light upon the matter. He found nothing.
"Ryson?" Lief nudged.
"Sorry," Ryson responded. He did his best to wipe the burden from his thoughts. He
attempted to focus on other pressing needs. He thought of Burbon, of Linda and Sy. He
wished to see them. He thought of Dunop and Yave. He wondered how the dwarves fared
against the sand giants and how the queen would deal with the appearance of Dzeb and
the other cliff behemoths.
With new questions replacing the old, he moved quickly into the empty corridor. "I
saw before that no one was down here. Are there any threats we should know about?"
"I sent the dwarf guards away," Dzeb replied with simplicity. "I did not think it was
wise to leave a potential conflict when they saw their prisoners freed."
"Did the guards leave when you asked them to, or did they resist?" the elf asked with
his own curiosity as to dwarf stubbornness in the face of a cliff behemoth.
"They took leave." Dzeb did not give a description as to the guards’ manner in retreat.
The delver took the lead. His memory of the corridors remained as strong as if he had
just walked them. He nimbly took to the stairs and led the group out of the palace depths.
A few palace guards took to posts near the throne room, but made no attempt to stop
them. The simple sight of the cliff behemoth left them in uncertain awe. They realized it
was these titans that had saved Dunop. Even the sight of the elf and the delver roaming
free could not sway the dwarves into attacking the behemoth.
Ryson pushed open into the throne room with authority of his own. He ignored the
guards at the door, not even giving them a glance. He stepped back into the room like a
returning hero, and to his liking, he spotted Yave upon the throne.
The queen sat rigid. Cold emotion bit at her cheeks. Her eyes swooped over them all;
Ryson, Lief, Dzeb, and the near lifeless hulk of Jon's body. If she cared even slightly for
Jon's welfare, it did not show. She viewed them all as enemies, even the cliff behemoth.
In her eyes, Dzeb did not save Dunop, no, he thwarted her moment of vindication, ripped
the honor of destroying the sand giants from her very grasp. Her anger remained, her
thirst for retribution unfulfilled.
Ryson grunted. Nothing would get through to this woman. Nothing would break the
grip of her hate. He felt pity for her, nothing more.
He would waste little more time or emotion on this depraved queen. He no longer
cared to try and influence her convictions or change her decision. That was simply no
longer necessary. The war was officially over. The cliff behemoths would take care of
ending the hostilities, of that he was certain.
He turned his attention to a more personal matter. He looked to a cloak on the floor
and moved to it with the grace of a floating feather. With fluidity, he pulled the cover off
the sword. Light filled the chamber and all welcomed it, all save Yave, who actually
turned her gaze away from the delver. The light did not bring physical pain to her eyes,
but it sparked memories that burned her core.
Ryson noticed the queen's reaction, but he would not sheath the talisman. He held it
aloft with pride.
With the hilt firmly in his grasp, a warmth spread through his body. The sword's
power reached into his consciousness. It seized upon the very questions which previously
haunted him. It gave him nearly every answer he required. He saw the damage to Burbon
as well as the casualties to the dwarf army. He saw how Yave waited for the sand giants
that never came. He saw the cliff behemoths before they left their mountains. He saw
how they left, when they left, but he could not see why they left. Their own personal
intentions were blocked from him, and perhaps this was best. With this vision, he gained
even greater perspective. Lief was right. The sword revealed knowledge, but it would not,
could not, reveal the intentions behind such knowledge.
Ryson beheld the enchanted weapon with greater respect and appreciation for this
power. He considered its affect on the queen and how he felt it failed to save the land. He
knew now that it had never failed in its true magical purpose, for it was never meant for
such use. It was not an item of such enchantment that it could sway the beliefs of another,
or that it could alter preference, or even prejudice. It decreed fact, nothing more and
nothing less. Further interpretation was left to the possessor. Perhaps, that is the way it
was meant to be. Free will, both to choose and to think. Of course, free will would only
go so far with the cliff behemoths on the matter of this particular war, and Dzeb spoke
with such authority.
"These attacks of yours will end," Dzeb commanded.
Yave almost erupted with fury. She would not take orders from anyone, not even a
cliff behemoth. One glance, however, at the other dwarves that had gathered in the
chamber brought her hesitation. In an instant, she realized that the cliff behemoth had
seized her power, the power of command over her own kind. They would listen to him,
not her. Her options dwindled like melting ice upon the sun.
Dzeb continued with disregard to Yave's stern demeanor. "You had no right to attack
the algors. They caused you no pain. You had no right to attack the humans of Connel or
Burbon, or the elves of Dark Spruce. Your anger breeds hate, and your hate opposes the
will of Godson. This will come to an end."
Yave managed to ask one simple question. "And if I refuse?"
"That is your right. You may choose to oppose Godson and continue the path you
have forged, but that truth will be known. There will be no further question as to why you
struggle. There will be no question as to which side you draw your alliances. What dwarf
will follow you on such a path? What city would remain your captive? The magic has
returned to Uton and with it many dark creatures. They would oppose the will of Godson
to the end of their days. You would be one with them. Is that your choice?"
Yave folded her hands and bowed her head. She hid the twisted contortions of her
face, but the uncontrollable shaking of her body was clear for all to witness. In a fit of
pure fury, she bolted from her chair and out of the throne room.
Dzeb did not watch her leave. He placed Jon upon the vacated throne. Even as the
dwarf body slumped sideways over the chair arm, he turned and gestured to the other
dwarves.
"Follow her as you will, but know that her claims are false. The algors did not take her
first son from her. The humans, the elves, the delvers; they are not your enemies. The
enemy to us all is the darkness she chases. That is her path, let us pray that it will not be
yours."
Dzeb turned and left. He made no motion of farewell to anyone, not to Lief, and not to
Ryson.
Ryson watched the back of the cliff behemoth until it turned out of sight. "No need for
goodbyes, I guess. But I have to tell you, it's hard to watch him leave."
Uncertainty replaced the emptiness caused by Dzeb's departure. The dwarves lacked a
leader. The diminutive citizens of Dunop had no one to guide them, no true path to
follow. The separatists had removed those that followed the monarchy, and now the
separatists had been scourged of power, partially by the humans at Burbon and
completely by the sand giants here in Dunop. The dwarf army was simply no more. No
generals, no War Com. Bol was gone, Strog was gone, Yave was gone. Jon remained, but
so too did the self-imposed trance which left him disjointed from reality.
Ryson looked to Lief with concern. He nodded to Jon who remained in his
unconscious state. "What's going to happen now?"
"I can not guess," the elf replied stoically. "I assume the cliff behemoths have
removed the threat of the sand giants. I can only assume further that the next move rests
with the dwarves themselves. That is basically what Dzeb said. It is their choice."
Ryson looked expectantly to the group of dwarf guards, sentries, and advisors.
"Well?"
No one answered.
Ryson shrugged. He decided to put the question before them as simply as possible. "Is
there anyone here that still wants war? Anyone that wants to challenge what the cliff
behemoth said? Everybody else wants this to end. I know Burbon doesn't want this to
continue. Is there still one among you that wishes to continue the war against the algors,
or the humans, or the elves?"
The dwarves looked at the delver. They looked at each other blankly. Some shook
their heads in descent, some remained still, but no one put forth a challenge of continuing
the hostilities.
Ryson found the near noncommittal response rather frustrating, but accepted the
unenthusiastic answer nonetheless. "Good. I'll take that to mean you want to live in
peaceful coexistence with the rest of us. I will give that word to Burbon."
"And I will bring such news to my camp," Lief added. "We will leave you now. You
have much to discuss and much to determine. You must also look to the health of your
king. We will leave him in your care hoping that you realize he also did not commit any
crimes." The elf then motioned for Ryson. "It's time for us to leave."
Ryson looked to Lief uncomfortably. He walked out of the throne room but hesitated
in the corridors. "Is that it?"
"What else can we do?"
"I don't know, but it doesn't seem like we're finished." Ryson lingered near the door.
"Maybe something more should be said. So much has happened. We were at war. Now
we think it's over and we just walk away? We're walking out of here with really no idea
of what's going to happen next."
"They are in a state of complete turmoil. I doubt they know what they will do next."
"That's what has me worried. They don't have a leader, we don't know if Jon will
recover, we don't know where Yave went. We really don't know much of anything.
Nothing feels complete. It's like nothing has been settled."
"That is how war often leaves things," Lief responded rather profoundly. "We can do
nothing more here. Any action you might see as helpful will only be looked upon as
meddling. We must leave them to their own affairs and hope they will not send their
army against anyone else."
"They won't do that," Ryson stated suddenly. "Not for a while at least."
Lief looked to the delver with interest. "How can you sound so sure of this?"
"Their army has been destroyed. You'll see when we get outside. I just know. The
sword showed me."
The two, however, did not reach the exterior of the palace before another calamity hit
the dwarves of Dunop. A winded sentry raced past the two and stumbled into the throne
room. Though his speed was nearly inconsequential to the eyes of the delver, his anguish
was not. The delver ignored any thought of leaving this matter to the dwarves. He turned
and moved back to the area of gathered dwarves. He heard the announcement with them,
but his expression carried even greater fear, greater comprehension of the nightmare.
"Shadow seeds!" the sentry cried through deep breaths. "Dropping down all over the
city. Trees are already growing!"

Stunned silence. Every dwarf in the chamber understood the depth of what they now
faced; a box of nightmares had been opened. The shadow tree was the weapon of pure
dread, a curse of excruciating painful death. Shadow tree seeds had been used only once
before, during the last great war between the elves and dwarves. The magically altered
trees devoured an entire city before the dwarves sealed the atrocities in a sarcophagus of
rock. They had not been used again, but their legacy remained etched in dwarf history.
The very thought of facing this horror sapped resolve even as it instilled gutwrenching panic. Trepidation bounded full enough to wash away the fatigue of every
calamity already faced that day, but the overwhelming terror slowed the dwarves' initial
reaction. Palace guards waited for orders, but there was no one to give them. Ministers
and advisors looked about in lost confusion. It was never their lot to make final decisions,
only to give opinions. There was only one in the room with the true authority of rule, but
if Jon understood the harsh dilemma Dunop now faced, it only served to drag him further
into his lifeless trance.
With no other alternative, advisors mumbled their only thoughts as if hoping to draw a
group consensus.
"We should send out guards to gather up the seeds quickly, before they start to grow,"
one offered. "We can bring them to the surface, make them whither in the daylight."
"It's too late," the warning sentry advised. "The seeds are already starting to grow. The
raiding goblins took many of our light gems. Most of the city is almost completely dark.
As soon as the seeds hit the ground they are shooting up into saplings. They are not big
enough to attack us yet, but they will be before we can stop them."
"How many seeds were dropped?" an advisor asked with halting breaths.
"Hundreds. Who knows?"
"We should evacuate immediately, seal off every tunnel as we leave."
Another advisor bore a painful truth. "We can't leave. We have no where to go. No
neighboring city will have us. The separatist revolt, remember?"
A collective groan echoed through the chamber.
Frustration bore the desperate. "Then we must flee to the surface." But these words
held little resolution. Life above ground amounted to near torture.
Again, silence prevailed.
One guard finally offered a defeated suggestion. "We can attempt to burn the trees. It
is our only chance."
Lief barged into the room revealing truths already known to the dwarves. "You can't
burn the trees. Flames won't hurt them once they begin to grow. You can only stop them
with sunlight."
Many of the dwarves stared angrily at the elf. They immediately connected him with
the seeds. Like jackals, they sneered.
"He is responsible," one accused. "His camp must have dropped the seeds upon us."
Without Dzeb's presence, the dwarf guards now moved without hesitation upon the
elf. They turned their fear into anger and focused it upon their target. They were slow and
plodding but they outnumbered Lief by a wide margin. They ultimately surrounded him
and took hold of his limbs. They threatened to pull him apart in a fit of anger.
Ryson roared above the din. "Take your hands off him!"
The dwarves paused but did not release the elf.
The delver persisted. "I have the means to save you, but only when you let him go."
Still, the dwarves retained their grip. "What can you do?" one barked.
Ryson pointed his sword at the heart of the questioning dwarf. "My sword magnifies
daylight. I can use it to burn the trees, or I can use it to fight you and free my friend.
Which will you have?"
A group of dwarves moved toward the delver. The sword might indeed hold their
salvation, and they considered taking it for their own.
Ryson leapt clear in a blur of motion that dazzled the dwarves. "Don't be fools. You
can't move quick enough to save your whole city. I can, but I won't until you let him go."
"You will promise to destroy the trees?"
"I'll promise to try. And I'll need his help as well. He's the only other one here fast
enough to help scout the city."
The dwarves held little in the way of options. Reluctantly, they released the elf,
though most did so with a shove.
Lief boiled over. "I did not drop the seeds on your stubborn heads, you damned moles.
I came here to stop it, came here to end the war before it came to this."
Ryson called out sternly. "Lief! Not now. I need your help."
Lief glared at the surrounding dwarves.
Again, the delver pressed the urgent need upon the elf. "There's no time for that. We
have to work while the sun's still up. As long as light comes through the tunnels, we have
a chance. Once night falls, it'll be all over."
Lief straightened, pushed the thought of the dwarves' aggressiveness from his mind.
"What is it you suggest?"
Ryson spoke quickly. "Pinpoint each seed, each growing tree. I can use the beam of
light from the swords tip to disintegrate them. It's the only chance."
Lief nodded. "You will have to move quickly."
"I plan to, but I'll still need help. I'm going to move north first, then come back and
take the east, then the south. I want you to go east first, make a preliminary scout. Find
where the seeds were dropped. They had to come from air holes or tunnels from above.
Look for them. Find them and mark them for me so I can see them from a distance, a
signal fire is your best bet. The more searching you do, the less I have to." Ryson then
turned to the dwarfs. "You had a good idea before. Pick up the seeds that haven't grown
or the saplings that are still small enough to handle. Get them topside. The more you can
help the better. And get all the light gems you can back in place. We need every little bit
of sunlight we can get."
Ryson didn't wait for an acknowledgment, he simply dashed off down the hall. The
beacon of his sword flashed through the corridors like a spear of lightning. Once beyond
the palace doors, the delver turned north. He didn't need the sun overhead to tell him east
from west. He didn't need landmarks as a reference. He simply knew which way to turn.
He rushed up the streets like an unbridled horse. His head swerved on his neck,
constantly searching for signs of the trees. He spotted the first cluster almost
immediately.
"Godson!" The sight chilled him, revived his memories of Sanctum's bowels. Shadow
trees - the name was perfect in description. Silhouettes of dead gnarled trees, black as tar
and as lifeless as ashes, thirsted for life in the darkness of an alleyway. The cluster
blanketed the width of the street. They spread like oozing sludge. They grew before his
eyes. Small shoots of new branches groped for the darkness. He shivered. Thankfully,
none had yet reached full size. The tallest was not yet above his own height, but even at
this stunted dimension, they stood like breeders of corruption.
He forced himself to step up to this orchard of disease. Reluctance gripped him,
slowed his every step. He finally stopped within an arm's length of the closest tree.
"Please let this work," he prayed.
He pointed the very tip of the sword toward the closest sapling. The branches were
already retracting from the sword's glow. When the tightly wound beam from the sword's
point blazed into the thicket, the thin trunks began to scatter.
Another sickening sight. These trees had no roots, nothing to bolt them into the
ground. When they felt the burn of magnified daylight, they scurried for the shelter of
darkness. The moved like wounded, mutated spiders, leaving slogging trails of black
filth.
Ryson gagged, had he eaten in the past few hours, he would have lost his meal. His
stomach, however, was already empty, and in this, he found solace. He turned his full
focus to his intended task. He used his great speed to circle the scattering trees. He herded
them back into a tight cluster. He then brought the full force of light upon them, one by
one.
They began to sizzle and burn, and finally, thankfully, disintegrate into thick black
smoke. The smell was horrendous, like old garbage cooking over lava.
He gagged again, but his arm remained steady. The laser thin beam shooting off the
point swooped like a wand through the thicket. The trees could not escape. They
dwindled in number. Ryson continued to circle about the dark grove, continued to keep
each tree under his attack. There was no sound other than the hissing burn. Soon, he had
eliminated the entire mass. He kicked at the remnants. Nothing remained but dirt and
soot.
"Thank Godson!" He heaved relief for only a moment. The task ahead was daunting.
He would return later to make sure nothing else grew, but he knew there were more
groupings in the darkness elsewhere. He continued his northward trek. He quickly found
another cluster. He also found greater distress and increased danger. The next grove
contained more trees with larger trunks. The reach of the branches expanded. With each
second in darkness, the trees were growing taller and more powerful. He turned his sword
upon them. They rescinded from the initial burst of light, burned with the same intensity,
but now they showed a willingness to fight back. Branches swooped down and around
the beam. They groped for the delver with the same tenacity in which they sought the
darkness. Black sludge dropped into thick puddles as skeletal branches flung outward in
an attempt to dislodge the sword from the delver's hands.
Ryson was forced to dodge as he circled the trees. Only his tremendous speed kept
him alive. As he continued the assault, more than one lunged for him. Thick trunks,
spindly branches; the trees attacked with their entire form in a final effort for survival.
The delver faced these new circumstances with grim anticipation for the continued
conflict. He understood his dilemma, all too well. The darkness of the city was allowing
the trees to grow as fast as he could move. The time spent on destroying a single grove
would allow each remaining group to grow larger and deadlier. He wondered how long it
would take before the trees would encompass too much space for him to destroy.
"I'm going to need more light," the delver professed heavily.
As if an answer to his wish, the glow from the city streets began to increase. The
delver did not slow in his attack, but the welcome illumination did not escape him.
"Light gems," Ryson stated with renewed optimism. He danced lively about the dense
formation of trees as he smiled at the slowly appearing outline of his own shadow. "I
hope the dwarves have more."
Indeed they did, for the faint glow seemed to increase gently with each passing
moment. Obviously the dwarves were hard at work around the city replacing light gems
at all corridors and airshafts. Sunlight began to bounce off the polished stone that
surrounded the entire city. It was not enough to truly hurt the trees, but it slowed their
growth. It also served to increase the power of the one weapon that could hurt them.
The enhanced light was magnified by the delver's sword. The beam from the point
grew brighter and longer, a laser of pure sunlight. It cut through the trees with greater
efficiency. Even as the trees had grown more resistant, they could not withstand the
growing intensity of this beam. They could not outmaneuver the delver, and they could
not block the devastating burn of their only weakness. They withered and steamed
instantly.
Ryson delighted in the change of momentum. With the power of his sword increased,
he found even greater energy. He moved with the swiftness of a hurricane wind, a speed
which only could be surpassed by light itself. He destroyed a collection of over a dozen
trees in but a heartbeat.
Ryson pressed onward, moving at speeds beyond the comprehension of the dwarves
that watched him. He covered the underground granite streets with jumps and bounds. He
darted about, shifting and leaping, turning and twisting. If not for the glowing blade of his
sword, he might as well have been invisible. As long as he moved, and he moved almost
constantly, the glowing blade served as the only beacon of his presence. He paused only
when first confronting a cluster of trees. After a near instantaneous inspection, his legs
would again carry him with perfect balance as he circled the trees like a controlled
tornado.
His mind kept a complete picture of the area he covered. He never doubled over
previously scouted roads, and he never missed even a single back alley. He moved with
all the grace and precision that was his to command. He covered the northern section of
the city, then the eastern boundaries. His task was made easier here by the signal fires set
earlier by Lief. His assault was complete in both these areas. No seeds and no saplings
survived.
Still, Dunop was no small city and the trees would not die without a struggle. Halfway
into the confrontation, the tide of battle again turned, this time against the delver. The
trees began to respond to the attacks before the delver could close upon them. As if they
realized their plight, they began to scatter as soon as they could move, fleeing from the
delver's sword and the death it would bring them.
Ryson now faced tracking down individual trees as opposed to massacring groups.
This slowed him greatly. The beam of his sword was now focusing on single trunks
rather than bunches of them. He was also forced into racing back and forth over the same
streets as he attempted to annihilate each fleeing tree.
The new tactic flustered Ryson, frustrated him. He felt as if he was chasing his tail.
Worse, he began to fear that in his haste, he might miss a tree. Such a mistake would hold
dire consequences. A single tree would grow rapidly in the pure dark of night and would
drop more seeds to produce more trees well before morning. The trees had to be
destroyed now, all of them. He called for the assistance of surrounding dwarves. He
needed them to watch for even one tree that might evade his own keen detection.
The dwarves assisted to the best of their ability. Their own eyesight, keen in the dim
light, proved invaluable. They guided the delver to many breakaway trees. They used
their diminutive size as well. They scouted low grounds and pointed out areas the delver
might have otherwise overlooked.
Ryson began to feel a dull ache in his legs and a sharper pain in his side. He was
finally tiring, but there was still roughly a third of the city left to scour. He bit back his
pain, but he could not forget it completely. It slowed him, forced him to pause on more
than one occasion. It would not, however, conquer his determination. Even as the trees
continued their attempts to evade him, he proceeded to follow every trail, to hunt them
down with cold precision.
He covered three quarters of the town when he finally met up with Lief. Only the
western section of the city remained. He barely slowed to speak to his friend when the elf
took hold of him.
"Hold yourself, Ryson. You've done enough."
Ryson tried to break free, but the elf held him firm. The delver questioned Lief with
irritability. He wanted to finish his job and he let Lief know it. "What are you talking
about? There's still the west side. We can't leave any trees. Even one can take over and
destroy the city."
"You saved the city," Lief reassured. "The dwarves will take care of the rest."
The delver finally came to a halt. As he stopped struggling against the elf's hold, Lief
released him. Ryson muttered the obvious question.
"How?"
"They're set to bury that portion of Dunop that you have not traveled. They're going to
collapse the roof above. They have already evacuated that section of the town. They will
bury the trees in a mountain of rock. They are willing to sacrifice that much."
"But they don't have to sacrifice anything. The sword's working."
"Not for much longer," Lief stated sadly. "The sun is setting outside. The light which
remains in Dunop is now more firelight than sunlight. Your sword will continue to glow
with that light, but it will not hurt the trees."
"But there’s still starlight! It stopped them in Sanctum," Ryson protested. "It was night
then."
"It kept them at bay. It did not destroy them," Lief corrected. "The starlight can indeed
hurt them, prevent them from growing, but not with same efficiency as daylight. This
deep in the ground, your sword would do little more than cut a path for you to move.
Nothing more. There are other problems as well. We tried to mark the spots for you, but
the trees have grown too large. That section of town was the darkest. They are moving
freely now. If you ventured into that portion of the city, you would do well simply to
survive. I am afraid you would be quickly overwhelmed and the trees would have the rest
of the city as well. It has to be this way. We should move back now."
Ryson resisted. He felt his mission incomplete, as if he had failed, but he could not
ignore the sight of retreating dwarves. They were already abandoning that section of
Dunop.
Lief pulled gently at the delver's arm. "Come on. You saved more of their city than
they could have hoped for."
Ryson allowed the elf to guide him away. They finally stopped near the front of the
palace.
"I suggest you cover your ears," Lief advised.
Ryson did so. He waited impatiently, watched for even the slightest movements of
activity. He caught a fevered pitch of action near the all-encompassing ceiling of rock. He
spied dwarves suspended from ropes with pick axes, shovels and sledge hammers. They
worked deftly, but their purpose was foreign to the delver. They seemed to be hammering
and digging in haphazard confusion. He soon realized that nothing was further from the
truth. The dwarves had acted in a harmony that rivaled that of the algors, and as they
struck one last time together, the tons of rock hanging over the western end of the city
collapsed in one large mass.
Ryson marveled at the sight. He could not fathom the weight and size of the rock that
fell, but the destruction was obvious. Marvelous dwarf structures, statues to their
brilliance in the art of construction, were immediately and thoroughly crushed by all
encompassing rock.
The ground shook with a great blast. A wave of force crashed forward from the
impact. Dwarves were sent sprawling as dust filled the air. It glittered in the beams
bouncing off the light gems.
Ryson maintained his balance even as Lief was sent to his knees. The delver turned
about to examine the effects of the blast upon the rest of the city. More testimony to the
dwarves great skill, the hardy buildings remained intact, undamaged as if nothing had
happened. And so it truly appeared, even at the very point of collapse. There was no sign
of devastation other than the absence of the western city section. There were no crumbled
buildings, no broken roads. Only rock. There were no crevices no cracks, the seal was
complete. It was as if the ground had meshed together and that portion of Dunop had
never existed.
Ryson immediately saw the symbolism in this grandiose display. That section of
Dunop was simply gone, gone like Yave, gone like the need for any further conflict. The
war was over. A wave of relief hit like a sledge hammer. He felt fatigue with the
realization that there was nothing left for him to do. He met his challenge, the need for
his involvement was at an end.
Lief gathered himself, rose to his feet, and brushed the dust off his clothes. He echoed
Ryson's very sentiments. "It seems the threat is over."
Unfortunately, not all agreed. An ordinary dwarf citizen stumbled up to them with a
mask of hostility. "No, thanks to you, elf." The description of Lief's race was accented
with hate and anger.
Another dwarf followed the first's lead, then another. A crowd soon surrounded them,
a crowd which quickly turned into an accusing mob.
"You dropped the seeds on us."
"You attacked my camp without provocation," Lief shot back.
"The seeds should have never been used," one dwarf cried.
Others joined in the tirade.
"We have lost part of our city because of you and the other elves. The shadow trees
are the ultimate act of war."
"A war you started," Lief replied belligerently.
"And a war we can finish," a dwarf sentry growled.
Lief laughed sarcastically. "With what army?"
"We will all take up arms. Other dwarves from other cities will join us. You have used
shadow trees against us! No dwarf will forgive that."
It was the delver that responded. "That's enough!" Ryson's face glowed crimson.
Veins bulged from the side of his head. His fatigue ruled his emotions. He blasted
everyone around him with shouts of frustration. "Haven't you learned anything?! Can
you possibly be this stubborn and stupid?"
"Yes, they can," Lief replied smugly.
The delver would not hold his fury simply to the dwarves. "Shut up, Lief!"
The elf recoiled with surprise.
Ryson continued. "I'm tired of all of you. The whole bunch of you. Things were better
off when I didn't even know any of you existed. Do you know that? How does that make
you feel?"
"What do we care what a delver feels?" one dwarf voice retorted.
"Because this delver saved your lives, saved your necks!"
"The cliff behemoths saved us, not you," another voice rebutted.
"Did the cliff behemoths save you from the trees? They saved you from the sand
giants. And who do you think told them of this nonsense?! I did. I don't know why they
came here, but now I'm sorry they did. You deserved to be crushed by the sand giants.
Especially, after what you did to the algors."
"The algors killed Tun," a female's voice cried defensively.
"That's nonsense. I was there. Tun died because he was just as stupid and stubborn as
the rest of you."
"Watch your tongue, delver," a dwarf guard called sharply.
"Why? What are you going to threaten me with now? Going to throw me in the
dungeon like you did before? And for what? All I ever tried to do was to help you."
"But the elves have committed the ultimate act of war. They have dropped the seeds
upon our town. We must respond."
"Is that so? And what about the algors. You attacked them. Slaughtered them! Don't
they have a right to send more sand giants? And what about the humans at Connel? I saw
what you did there. And why? I know why. Oh, I know for damn sure why. Your queen
wanted to get even with me. She knew that I used to live there. That's why thousands of
humans died. She ordered the attack on my home for the same reason. When I go back,
what am I going to find? Neighbors and friends dead. Buildings destroyed. Does that give
me the right to kill all of you right now? Don't tempt me."
A single delver attacking the remnants of a once proud city, the thought was ludicrous,
but the dwarves saw the resolve in the delver. Could they stop him? Could they even
catch him?
Ryson, however, turned his venom quickly upon the elf. "And what about you?"
"What about me?" Lief responded unwaveringly.
"Your people are now just as responsible for this stupidity as the dwarves," Ryson
shot back. "Petiole dropped the seeds. You can't deny that."
"I don't intend to, but what has that got to do with me?"
Ryson glared with disbelief at Lief's apparent hold to blameless detachment. "He's the
leader of your camp."
"I was against the use of the seeds. I made him promise to hold off."
"He broke his word. He almost got us killed. What are you going to do about it?"
"What can I do about it?"
"See that he never does it again!" Ryson replied angrily, fists clenched tightly. He
yelled louder, with greater conviction. "Remove him from power. Take away his right to
lead."
Lief began to speak, but Ryson spoke over him.
"I know. I know. You can't do anything about it because its’ the way you have to live.
It's your tradition. More garbage! What he did was unconscionable. It was sinful. We had
this stopped. It was over. The cliff behemoths saw to that. The seeds fell and now it's
starting all over again. You know what that means? It's all in Petiole's lap now. It was
easy for you to blame Yave when she started things. What about now? The plain simple
truth is that Yave was stopped, history! The war was over, and then, the seeds came.
Your camp! Do you understand? Your camp is now responsible. Petiole is responsible.
What are you going to do about it?"
"What can I do? The guards ..."
Ryson growled with contempt. "What do I care about your guards? Petiole is a
menace. A worse menace then Yave. For the love of Godson Lief, think about what that
bastard did. He was so worried about his own image, his lousy status among the other
camp elders, that he was willing to destroy an entire city. What does that say? If you
leave him in power, what does that say about you? Yave was wrong, she acted out of
anger and hate. That's bad, terrible, but what Petiole did was worse. He acted out of
weakness, pride, and selfishness. How can you even trust a person like that? Guards or no
guards and to blazes with your tradition, if Petiole is still in charge after this, it means
you're all a bunch of killers. There's no excuse for this. None whatsoever. He promised us
time. Time he never gave us!"
Lief was silent.
Ryson let the elf ponder his words. He turned his fury back upon the dwarves. "And as
for you. You don't have a choice! In case any of you have forgotten, the cliff behemoths
said there would be an end to this war. This stops here! Now, I want out of this place. I
want to get home. Give me and this elf an escort back to Dark Spruce."
Far removed from the center of the Dunop, deep within a tunnel leading to the surface,
Dzeb listened to the final echoing words of the delver. He smiled with glowing grace.
"Very good, Ryson. May Godson always bless you."

Ryson was back at Burbon. He surveyed the damage with Sy as he recounted his own
experiences in Dunop. The sight of the crumbled wall did little to lift his spirits. The
delver thought mostly of Yave, how it was her anger that spilled over to create so many
hardships. But that was not his only thought. He thought of the elves and Petiole. He
considered the serp and how it gained from the conflict between them all. He thought of
the innocent in Burbon and Connel, even the algors in the Lacobian. He even considered
the magic and what it was doing to the land. Apparently, it had saved Burbon, or at least
it had done so through Enin, but what would happen if such power was controlled by the
corrupt? Long ago, the magic was used to create the shadow trees. What would happen
now, in a time when evil felt so close at hand? Such weighty reflections chagrined the
delver, and he seemed almost despondent as the captain of the guard revealed his own
considerations.
"It'll be a while before the wall is complete, but I think with the towers in place, we'll
survive." Sy spit on the ground. He kicked dirt over the patch of saliva as he rubbed any
moisture from his lips. "With all the training our people received from the elves, most of
the civilians can now shoot a bow better than most regulars. More than a handful have
volunteered for continued duty, even after what you said about the dwarves not being a
threat anymore. I'm putting three to four archers on each platform with the watch. They
can do a lot of damage to anything trying to cross the clearing."
Sy took a moment to survey the grounds. Most of the rubble was cleared from the
streets. He looked west, he had an unobstructed view of the hills. He gauged the distance
between the two broken ends of the unfinished wall. The gap was wide, but it was closing
with each plank of wood and each brick of clay and mortar. He considered the resources
necessary to finish the job.
"Times are different now," the captain considered aloud. "All these resources put to
defending ourselves. We could have used them to build homes, expand. It's funny,
though, the people don't complain. The town's about bankrupt. Things are going to be
tough the next few seasons. Still, they won't say anything. I guess people realize what's
truly important in times like this. We could have built twenty taverns with the brick and
wood needed for that wall, but everyone knows none of that is any good if we're all dead.
We have to make different sacrifices now. We have to think about just surviving. The
people seem to realize that. I think that's why they fought the dwarves the way they did."
Sy cast a heavy breath and then spit again. "Well, we can rest a little easier, for a
while at least. I guess the only thing we have to worry about now is an occasional shag or
river rogue, and maybe the goblins. But I doubt they'll be trouble anytime soon,
especially if they stole as much treasure as you think. I can't imagine why they'd risk a
raid at this point. They can pretty much buy any supplies they might need. There are
enough carpetbaggers out there that would sell to anyone, or even anything. I guess that's
the one thing that won't change, even with everything else that's going on. There's always
someone willing to do anything for money, even sell food to goblins."
"Or weapons," Ryson added.
The thought bothered Sy. "Yeah, that's true, too. Maybe I shouldn't stop worrying
about the goblins. That sneaky little serp didn't come back this way. I knew he wouldn't
honor our bargain, and I know he's out there watching us. If some nut sells him a long
range weapon, he won't think twice about attacking us."
"It's something we should all worry about," Ryson replied. The delver looked
uncomfortable. He started to speak, but held his tongue.
Sy was quick enough to pick up on it. "Something on your mind?"
"Lots of things," Ryson admitted. He began to expel his thoughts. He let his worries
loose, as if speaking them might exorcise his own personal demons. "I have no idea
what's going to happen with the elf camp. I left Lief without saying much else to him. He
knows what I think of Petiole. I think he feels the same way. But ..."
"But you don't know if he'll do anything about it," Sy finished.
"I don't know if he can," Ryson added. "Petiole's got control of the elf guard. As long
as they back him, he remains in power, a little dictator given control because he's the
eldest."
"Doesn't make much sense, does it?" Sy replied. "I wonder myself what's going to
happen out there. I really appreciated having the elves here. They helped us more than I
could have hoped, but with what I've heard of this Petiole character, you just don't know."
"I wish Mappel were still there," Ryson admitted.
Sy never met Mappel, though he heard of the deceased elf's abilities. He knew good
leaders were hard to find, even harder to replace. And he knew Petiole was not a close
substitute. "I guess that's how the elves feel. Well, it's their problem. They seem pretty
straightforward thinkers. I'm sure they'll find a way to do what's right. What else's got
you worried?"
Ryson groaned. "Name it. The serp out there in the hills with all that dwarf gold is
going to use it against us. I think that's a certainty. Then, there's the algors. They sent out
the sand giants to destroy Dunop. I have no idea what will happen if they find out the
cliff behemoths destroyed their creations. If they hear the whole truth, they'll probably be
satisfied. The dwarves suffered a whole lot of casualties. There's nothing left of their
army. And speaking of the dwarves, I left Dunop with Jon basically comatose and no
other leader in sight. And then there's Yave. I have no idea where she went, but I know
she wasn't happy, or ready to just forget everything."
"I wouldn't worry about Yave," Sy advised. "If things happened the way you told me,
she's got nothing left to attack us with. She's on her own."

Yave retraced the steps of the sand giants that attacked her home. She moved through
underground passages grumbling in half-sentences and cursing in muttered snarls. She
moved westward in tunnels which stretched below the Lacobian desert. She could not
feel the heat, for she was far below the surface, but an image of her final destination
etched itself in her mind, residue from her encounter with the Sword of Decree.
Somewhere below a point of pure desolation, she began her ascent to the surface. The
dethroned queen savagely ripped at the soft ground, ripped through soil with her
powerful, bare hands. Rock and dirt slowly gave way to sand, and her momentum
increased. She shoved the sediment behind her as she pressed her face forward into the
darkness of her handmade tunnel. Sand filled the rolls of her royal garb, granules spilled
into her mouth and eyes. She ignored the stinging pain and the dry, bitter taste. She broke
through to the surface with an indignant shout of conquest. She pulled herself to her feet
not bothering to brush the caked sand from her person. Her eyes turned to the south. In
the far distance, she spied a small oasis, a plot of life in this barren hell which she already
knew existed.
She labored through the sand, trudging across the desert, moving more out of bitter
determination than anything else. The light burned her eyes, the desert sun clouded her
vision. The damage was permanent, but she ignored her pain as well as her dwindling
sight. She moved from a memory, a slice of knowledge placed in her brain.
The Sword of Decree had showed her all that had occurred in Sanctum. She saw her
son die, but she saw other events as well. She saw a sorceress, a human woman that was
also in Sanctum. The sorceress took the name Tabris, and at the time of the sphere, she
didn't want to be a magic caster, but the damned delver forced his will upon her. Now,
the sorceress had power, power to help Yave defeat all who opposed the sanctity of Tun's
memory. The human woman dwelled in this portion of the desert, she had created this
oasis. The sword had given the dwarf queen that knowledge as well.
Tabris stood at the edge of a small pond, a collection of fresh water created by her
many spells of storms and squalls. Vegetation was thick here, coaxed to life by the
moisture as well as her magic. She could not control nature with the same power she
controlled the storms, but her magic was enough to grow fruit trees in the middle of a
lifeless desert. She did not expect Yave's arrival, but she noticed the lonely traveler
before the dwarf entered the oasis. She continued to soak in the magic surrounding her as
she greeted her visitor.
"You are lost, dwarf." The sorceress spoke plainly and without joy in seeing a visitor
or anger in confronting a trespasser. The dwarf queen's presence meant little to her, an
oddity to be sure, but nothing that truly evoked a meaningful response from the sorceress.
Yave could barely see the outline of the taller woman before her. Though her vision
was aided by the existence of shade trees, she still had to squint out the bright light. She
showed no sign of welcoming the cooler temperatures of the oasis. Her personal comfort
was immaterial; her quest for justice was her only desire.
"I am not lost," Yave spouted like a drunkard finding an unattended bar. "I came to
see you. You are Tabris, the sorceress that entered Sanctum."
Tabris looked deeply into the mind of the dwarf. The exiled queen was easy to read.
Yave's emotions burst like fireworks on a clear, dark night. Her desires flared like hungry
flames burning dry wood. "And you are Yave, mother of the deceased Tun Folarok. What
would you have me do, dwarf? Use my power against the delver, strike out at the elves of
Dark Spruce, and then finish the algors? Is that what you wish? I do not hold to your
beliefs."
Yave grunted as her hatred deepened. "You did not want to be a sorceress," she hissed.
"The delver forced you into this. You must desire justice for your own sake."
"I have not yet decided on that," Tabris announced. "My path is not chosen as of yet.
My choices in Sanctum have not led to a conclusion."
"My path is concluded!" Yave bellowed. "I need your help!"
Tabris looked upon the dwarf apathetically. "As I have already asked, what would you
have me do? I will not attack, not on this day anyway."
Yave grimaced. "Loose your energies upon me. Give me the power to attack. If you
do not seek justice, at least do not hinder one who does."
Tabris barely acknowledged the request. Her thoughts began to drift to other matters.
She considered the alteration and expansion of her known spells. The dwarf queen was
simply not of great importance. She was more of a gnat buzzing at her ear. The sorceress
answered with casual disregard. "I gain nothing in such an action. Your purpose is not of
my concern."
"What is it you want from me, witch?" Yave demanded. "What must I pay? Name
your price."
"You have nothing to offer," Tabris responded.
Yave heaved in frustration. Her teeth ground together as she clamored for attention.
"There must be something. There are gems where I come from, stones which can hold
magic. There are weapons for your enchantment, metals and stone to build a suitable
palace."
"I need no such items," Tabris replied with her mind on other thoughts.
"What do you need?" Yave asked fitfully.
"I need to practice my craft."
Yave grasped an idea and embraced hope. "Practice on me. Is there not a spell you
might wish to try which could benefit us both? Something which will give me the power I
need?"
"You are a dwarf and very resistant to magic," Tabris replied, but her attention seemed
to refocus.
"I will open myself to your spell."
Tabris considered the offer. Possible spells flooded her mind. "There is something I
have been hoping to try."
"Will it strengthen me? Allow me to exact justice?"
Tabris nodded. "My natural focus is in the power of storms, my magic is dark violet. I
have often wondered if I could power the spirit essence of a minion with the strength of
storm. If successful, your body would be destroyed. The substance of your being would
be transferred to the center of a powerful tempest. Your consciousness would remain, but
you would no longer be of mortal form. You would become the force and the drive of a
storm. Once the spell is cast, you would have independent thought and you could bring
the strength of a storm upon whomever you choose… as long as I allow it."
Yave hungered greedily for the power. She could not contain herself. "Cast the spell!
Do not wait!"
Tabris shrugged. She rubbed her hands together, set them as if praying. Her eyes
rolled over white. Her head bowed back as she called for the power of a storm. A violet
diamond formed about her hands, the sides rotating, bristling with magic. Her pupils
slowly returned, and she set them on the sky. She threw her hands up over her head, and
the purple diamond bolted to the heavens.
Dark, angry clouds formed over the desert, ignoring the heat, ignoring the sun. They
rumbled with purpose. A bolt of lightning struck Yave. It disintegrated her body as it
swallowed the dwarf queen's spirit.

Lief spoke barely a word to the other elves that surrounded him. His eyes drifted
across the grounds of Dark Spruce. He searched for Petiole, but found no sign of the
elder. For the most part, he ignored the questions of those eager to hear news of the
events in Dunop, until someone asked how he survived the shadow trees.
Lief's eyes narrowed, his voice rang out bitter. "I survived because Ryson Acumen
showed greater courage than our leader. I survived because cliff behemoths are far wiser
than Petiole could ever hope to be."
The crowd of elves revealed shock. Some tensed, others gasped, but the whole waited
for some shred of explanation.
Lief gave it willingly, angrily. "The shadow tree seeds should never have been
dropped. It was the action of a coward, a weak and sniveling coward. A river rogue
would have greater sense."
Lief turned about to find any objection. He was met with only stunned silence. He still
could not find Petiole. He fumed. "Where is our elder? Where is the fool who would not
hold to his word? Where is the jackass that would dare to repeat the greatest crime of our
race?"
One from the crowd called out meekly. "He waits at the far eastern perimeter. He
counsels with the guard."
Lief shook his head in disgust. "He counsels with no one. He hides like a worm in the
mud. He looks to the guard for protection, but he can not hide from what he must admit.
Follow me. All of you follow me."
Lief stormed through the crowd. He moved to the east, straining to find a silhouette in
the shadows. When he spotted a lone figure lurking behind an old oak, he moved upon it
with judgment in his mind.
Petiole immediately called for guards to his side. They seemed to take too long, but
they reached him before Lief.
Lief scorned the sight. He ignored the guards. His eyes lit on Petiole with angry
purpose. The words dripped from his mouth like poison from a snake. "You dropped the
seeds. You didn't give us the time you promised. You broke your word, and you
committed a crime."
Petiole cringed. "I committed no crime!" The elder scrambled to find excuses. "I
sought only the protection of my camp. You did not return. I had to think of the others."
"You thought only of yourself!" Lief hissed. "And you are a criminal. The war was
over! Yave was defeated, removed from power. The cliff behemoths saw to that. They
declared there would be no further violence, but then the seeds fell. You dropped them
after the battle was won!"
"I had no idea!" Petiole whined.
"You gave us five days!" Lief growled. "If you kept your word, you would have
known."
Petiole looked upon the crowd of elves, elves of his camp, elves that were supposed to
follow his word. He saw doubt in their eyes. Lief was destroying his ability to lead - not
just questioning his authority, but removing it. He fought back like a trapped animal with
no way of escape.
"Do not tell me what my word was! Why would you need such time? How was I to
know the cliff behemoths would intervene. The delver said they would not come. I was
misinformed. I made decisions based solely on the safety of this camp."
"Fire upon you!" Lief cursed. "You think only of yourself. And you spout lies. Don't
you think I know what has happened since I left? I have heard the news. The dwarf army
was forced to retreat from Burbon. They suffered heavy casualties. There was no chance
of an attack on our camp. You knew that. You dropped the seeds out of your own fear!"
The other elves considered the point. News had spread of the battle at Burbon. They
all knew of the dwarf defeat. Petiole should have known as well. Why would he order the
seeds dropped if he knew the dwarves suffered such great losses? More than one set of
eyes fell harshly upon the elder.
Lief fed their anger, raised more questions. "Why would you even risk such a thing?
Did you discuss the action with other elf camps? Did you even consider it?"
Petiole fought to defend his actions. "Why must I consult with other camps? We are
the ones that faced the danger. Other camps, elf or not, should have no say in our
personal matters."
Lief could not hold his fury, and had no desire to do so. "You imbecile! Have you no
brain?! Dropping shadow tree seeds on Dunop is more than a reaction to a raid. It is an
act of barbarism. Dwarves from all of Uton would hear of the deed. What do you think
would be happening now if the delver did not save Dunop? Every dwarf city would be
ready to raise arms against us. Another elf-dwarf war. That's what you would have
caused."
The possibility rang true. Many elves cringed at the thought. All out war with the
dwarves would be beyond disastrous.
Petiole wavered with indecision. He pained for a way out, an escape from the accusing
mob. "What else was I to do? Yes, I heard the news of the dwarf attack on Burbon. I
believed it meant you failed. That is why I dropped the seeds."
Lief sent the dagger strike to Petiole. "You dropped the seeds because you are weak,
because you are not like Mappel."
Petiole erupted. "No, I am not Mappel! Every elf talks of Mappel. No one listens to
me. Every time I make a decision, I face the same question. Is that what Mappel would
have done? I don't care what Mappel would have done! I am the elder of this camp. I
make the decisions. Now, I order that you be banished from this camp. You have
questioned my authority for the last time. I order the guards to escort you away from
Dark Spruce."
Lief glared. “I know too well the tradition and oath that binds the guard. I know it well
enough to say that though they must protect the camp elder, they must also follow the
law, the law you have no broken for all to see. You ordered the use of shadow trees when
they were no longer needed. You broke your word and risked all out war. You failed to
act in the best interests of this camp, indeed for the best interest of all the elves. You did
so out of your own cowardly reasons. Do any of your advisors or counselors deny this?”
As Lief looked around, not one spoke out in denial.
“Does anyone refute the charges I have named against this elf?”
Again, silence.
Petiole stammered. “You cannot make any charges. You are banished. Guards, take
him away now!”
The guards did not move.
Petiole stood aghast. "Take him, I said."
The guards on the ground returned to the trees. Petiole cringed with horror and
disbelief, stepped back with a weakening will and a festering fear.
Lief eyed Petiole with disgust. "The camp must decide what to do with you. You have
committed a crime too atrocious to simply ignore. Dropping the seeds could have meant a
greater war, it could have meant the lives of far too many."
"He must pay for his crime," an elf called from the crowd.
"He should be turned over to Dunop," another stated. "It is the dwarves that must
decide the just punishment."
Lief nodded in agreement, as did many others.

"This isn't right," Sy grumbled. "Storms don't come in like this. Not even in the
growing season, and we're just about at dormancy. What do you make of it?"
Ryson had no answer. He'd seen nothing like it before. Dark purple clouds rushed in
from the southwest, raged forward like a rabid wolf, but then halted at the very edge of
Burbon. Directly overhead, a clear border existed between the clear blue sky and the
angry tempest. Lightning flashed, streaked to the ground, and hit the hills which bordered
the clearing. Thunder exploded, shaking buildings, and startling nearly every member of
town. Gale blasts creased the hill grass. Within the center of the tumult, the billowing
clouds continued to ebb and flow, to undulate like a liquid in a boiling cauldron, but the
storm itself ceased to move forward. It had simply stalled. Wind blown rain crashed
against the hills, but not a drop fell upon Burbon's streets.
"I don't know," the delver admitted. "It's getting awfully warm. It's like a hurricane."
Sy questioned the theory. "Here? From the southwest? This time of the year?"
"I know. It doesn't make any sense."
"And why did it just stop? I've never seen a storm do that in my life. How long has it
been just sitting out there? It's like it's watching us. Whatever this is, it's not natural."
"You thing this is more magic?"
"What else could it be?" Sy grunted. "Where's Enin?"
"I haven't seen him."
"Blast. This has got to be something he can understand a whole lot better than us."
"I can go try and find him."
Before the delver could move, an angry voice held him in place.
"Send me the delver!" The tempest demanded.
Ryson turned pale. His vast memory linked the voice with one he had heard before.
"Godson! It's Yave."
"The dwarf queen?" Sy gaped.
For Ryson, there was no doubt. "It's her."
The delver stared into the storm, stared in pure astonishment. He looked to the clouds
with wonder, looked for something beyond the wind and rain which would link the
tempest to the dwarf queen. He searched for an outline of a face in the clouds, but he
found nothing. Only the acrimonious voice of the storm indicated Yave's presence, and it
prevailed her will once more.
"Deliver Ryson Acumen to me or I will destroy everything in my path. I will kill
everyone in this puny human town." To punctuate her threat, a bolt lightning struck the
ground a mere two paces in front of the south gate. The thunder clap was deafening.
The town grew still with indecision. They had seen the great power of their own
wizard, they knew there was energy beyond their previous understanding, but this went
far beyond their expectations. They had fought with elves against dwarves. They had
seen shags and goblins, met with monsters of different shapes and sizes, but now, the
wind and sky shaped itself against them. Their leader professed the simple question
which set upon nearly every tongue.
"How do we fight this?" Sy groaned to himself. "We have no way to defend. This is a
storm!" He put a hand to his forehead as his thoughts wrangled over useless tactics.
"I have to go out there," Ryson offered in a defeated tone.
Sy's head swung about with astonishment. "What? Are you crazy? What good is that
going to do? That storm will kill you."
Ryson pointed out what was now obvious. "I'll be dead either way. If I stay here, she'll
take the town apart to get to me. She's coming after me. I don't know how she became a
storm, but that's what she is. I know this is ludicrous, but what choice do I have? Where
am I going to hide? Look at the wind. She can sweep the land clean of every building
here."
"You can run," Sy offered frantically. "You move like nothing else in the land. You
can run and hide."
"I can't outrun that. I can't outrun the wind."
"No," Sy commanded. "You're not going to just sacrifice yourself. We're going to find
Enin. He might have an answer."
Movement at the south gate caught both their attentions. Unthinkably, the gate swung
open. A single figure stepped forward, away from the wall and into the clearing.
"Enin!" Ryson whispered.
The wizard threw off his cloak, let it flutter to the ground carried by the border winds
of the storm. He folded his hands before him, and he stared blankly into the heart of the
tempest.
Yave's voice bellowed over the scream of the wind. "I asked for the delver. I do not
know you. You were not at Sanctum. Who are you?!"
"Your end," Enin replied softly. The whispered response was carried to the skies by
the wizards will.
Lightning struck in response. It was meant to disintegrate the wizard, but it was forced
to bend away from the lone figure. It smashed harmlessly into the clearing.
Enin's eyes glowed restless. "You have not the power to hurt me."
A howl erupted from the storm. The clouds swirled, the tempest began to surge. It
threatened to sweep forward to crush Burbon in one massive thrust, but the clouds again
ceased their progress, this time not by Yave's will but by Enin's.
Enin swung his hands to his head. Two circles of white power weaved their way about
his wrists. He called to Yave his understanding of the truth. "You are a dwarf with no
magic of your own. Your power is limited, where mine is not. You have elected to mix
your essence with this storm. An unwise decision."
The circles broke from his arms. They flew upward, but they left a line in their wake,
a conduit back to the wizard. The two rings expanded, encompassing the full breadth of
the storm. They wrapped about the clouds and they stifled any chance of escape. Enin
took hold of the trailing band, pulled as if he was tightening a noose. And indeed, the
circles of white magic shrunk in size, compacted the storm.
Yave fought against the tense grip. She struggled to be free, to loose her fury on all of
Burbon, but the clouds which now held her soul could not breach the harness. She felt
what was left of her spirit collapsing upon itself. In a fit of rage, a barrage of lightning
exploded form her core. Streaks of electric energy knifed downward with the malice of
her hate. Thunder clap after thunder clap resonated into one massive burst of a deafening
roar. Still, the bolts of energy could not pass beyond Enin's will. They could no more hurt
him than they could strike a single building of Burbon. Each strike crashed into the hills,
burned tall grass and charred dark soil, but the assault did no other damage.
Enin willed his own might upon the long line of magic. He pulled as if joined in a tugof-war with the powers of heaven. But this was no god. This was all that was left of
Yave's crazed spirit. The rings closed tighter, shrunk until they pulled the storm clouds
into one compact ball. With one last pull, the circles of energy tightened into a closed
knot.
An explosion lit the sky. Enin's white magic vanished. The clouds of the tempest
broke from their restraints. They spread across the sky in all directions, but the dark
purple began to bleed from their substance. They no longer surged with power, and there
were no more bolts of lightning. That which remained appeared as nothing more than an
approaching winter storm.
Ryson ran at full speed to the side of the wizard. The guards at the south gate barely
saw him pass. He came to a complete stop to face his friend.
"Are you alright?"
Enin smiled lightly. "Slightly tired, a little empty, but no lasting damage."
"What about Yave?"
"She is no more."
Ryson looked deep into the clouds hanging overhead. He could no longer hear Yave's
angry threats, but the clouds would not vanish. "Could she still be up there somewhere?"
Enin shook his head. "What is left in the sky is the remnants of the storm, but what
was left of Yave is gone forever."
Ryson looked to the sky and watched the clouds spread to a more natural formation.
He could no longer sense anything unnatural about the storm. Yave was indeed gone, and
in truth, he felt more optimism than grief. He hoped this signified the end of the madness
which took far too many innocent lives.
With these thoughts, the delver watched the skies carefully. The raging purple faded
away into a softer gray. The temperature dropped as the heat of Yave's anger no longer
existed to fuel the storm. Any threat of lightning dissipated in the growing cold, and the
last rumble of thunder faded off into the distance. The wind was cold, but now
reassuringly light. With the anger of the storm diminished, the land lulled into the
soundless bliss of dormancy.
"It sure got peaceful," Ryson noted.
"The dormant season is a time of rest," Enin suggested.
Ryson considered the thought. He looked to the sky and saw the light gray clouds
filling the heavens. As his breath was now visible, he rubbed his hands together to warm
them against the cold. He did not wish to escape the chill. He welcomed it. He also
welcomed a new hope. As he earlier recalled the blessings of the harvest season, he now
reminisced about the hidden joys of dormancy. He put aside his worries over goblin raids,
and serps with shags. He stopped agonizing over simply surviving and considered the
simple pleasures of living. Maybe the dormant season would lead to harder times, but
then again, maybe not. Maybe it was as Enin said, a time of rest, a time of peace. Right
now, he could not remember a more quiet time. As the frustration and gloom vanished
slowly from his soul, he whispered a silent wish, a wish that was granted.
It began to snow.


“I wonder what spell could possibly be cast that would allow an ordinary person to
mimic your skills. Watching you is almost beyond belief.”
Ryson Acumen shook his head and replied with a laugh. “This said by a wizard that is
right now flying over my head.”
Indeed, Enin was quite literally flying just above the tree tops, but the delver’s
response was lost on the wizard. Swooping and gliding through the air, Enin continued to
peer through the leafless branches as he studied the delver from nearly every angle.
Trying to categorize Ryson’s movements and match them to a potential spell, however,
proved much more difficult than flying and even more elusive than the cold wind that
blew through the clear blues skies of this day. Watching the delver closely, the wizard
marveled at how Ryson could leap, run, twist and turn—basically dance without rest or
pause through, over and under the myriad of obstacles the forest presented.
As he often did, Enin began to speak out loud, more to himself than anyone else, as he
considered the purpose of his desire.
“So many different aspects, even animal tendencies, I see perfect qualities of nature
within you. You move with the grace of so many different animals at once, it would be
almost impossible for me to try and match your powers with any spell, or even series of
spells, that might match the particular skills of a single animal. I mean really, you move
like a cat but without the predatory aim. You dart about like a fish in the sea, but without
the haphazard defensive response.”
“Sounds like a catfish,” Ryson offered playfully.
The wizard ignored him. “And it’s not just simulating the advantages of different
animals, it goes well beyond that. There’s definitely an instinctive quality in the way you
move, instinctive like a horse that gallops effortlessly just because it can. And it goes
beyond animal instinct, you have the very essence of nature within you. You have a
quality of the wind about you. Your movements flow steadily yet you can change
directions with ease. The problem is you don’t swirl, that means a wind definition would
be very difficult. No, wind movement wouldn’t work. Shame actually. The problem is
compounded by the fact that you create very little heat which amazes me to this moment,
so I wouldn’t even begin to know how to add an element of fire for lift. The power that
allows you to move the way you do seems to be beyond the normal elements of nature.”
Enin willed himself forward at a greater pace. He was having a difficult time keeping
up with the delver at these speeds even though his path was clear of all obstacles while
Ryson faced a continuous barrage of trees and underbrush that filled this section of Dark
Spruce Forest. Still, Enin remained focused on his spell considerations and his desire to
match Ryson’s speed forced him forward at a faster pace.
“There are so many different facets to magical energies—wind, fire, water, air,
shadow, illusion, light—I find it amazing to see so many close connections with your
abilities, yet I still can’t define with accuracy even one component. I believe there is
definitely an inherent connection to the land, but it’s even harder for me to pinpoint that
one. Some science-loving egghead once told me about magnetism and how it might help
explain the magical energies. Well, this man’s ramblings went on and on with no clear
point but—.”
“Not like yours of course,” Ryson chuckled to himself.
Enin ignored the implication. “The point is he just didn’t want to admit that magic
existed, which kind of threw his whole perspective out of balance. I mean really, how can
you deny that magic exists when you are staring into the face of a mountain shag or a
river rogue? While his overall theory was truly absurd, he did have some interesting
points. I always have to keep in mind that the physical world does intertwine with the
magical energies. It wouldn’t surprise me if somehow or other the idea of magnetism is
somehow linked with your powers. The land has its own magical properties and they
seem to be present in you as well.”
Ryson did not stop moving, but he did call out louder this time with the obvious
intention of being heard. He found this consideration interesting and didn’t want the
wizard to dismiss his question. “You’ve said that word before when you analyzed me,
‘powers’. Sounds to me as if you think I’m using magic like you do. Is that what you
think?”
“Like me?” the wizard sounded almost baffled at first. “No, no, no—not like me at
all.” With that said, the wizard floated down into the trees and closer to ground level so
that he could carry on this new conversation more personally. He continued to fly as it
was the best way he could keep up with the delver, but he felt the discussion at hand was
now more sensitive and he felt the need to be closer to Ryson before he spoke. “One of
the most amazing things about the magic is how different it affects each one of us as well
as each race. You know what is most amazing about the delvers?”
“Enlighten me.”
“You don’t use the magic, you are the magic.”
Ryson raised an eyebrow at the wizard. “Come again? I am the magic. I have no idea
what that means.” The delver continued moving, albeit at a much slower pace to
accommodate the wizard that now had to navigate through the trees as well. Ryson didn’t
want to move too far away from Enin mostly because he wanted to hear this explanation.
The wizard heaved a heavy breath as he tried to place his words in a context that
Ryson could understand. He didn’t feel he had to speak down to the delver, but there was
a lack of equal reference points. He understood magic in ways almost no one else in the
land could. For him to speak of magic to another, it was almost like explaining music to
someone totally tone deaf. He grabbed on the story of legend that ended up being so
consequential to Ryson and the return of magic to Uton.
“When Ingar made that sphere of his,” Enin began, “it was supposed to remove all the
magical energy in the land. It did, but only that energy that was free. It could not remove
energy that was kept internally. That’s why magic casters were afraid to cast spells after
the sphere was created. Once they let it out of their being, it was free to be absorbed by
the sphere. Magic that is held to, or stored within, was safe from the sphere as long as it is
not cast free. You follow this logic, yes?”
“Yes.”
“Very good. Keeping with that thought, you should be able to follow that magic is
absorbed in different ways by different creatures. Some can store great quantities, some
are incapable of storing any at all. Some are very susceptible to spells, and others are very
resistant. These qualities can vary greatly in degree. For whatever reason, I was given the
gift to do more that just store and use magical energy. I have a very deep and personal
connection to it. I can store vast amounts internally and I can draw energies from various
sources from great distances.”
“Won’t argue that,” Ryson allowed. “Doesn’t answer the question, though, which is
what does that have to do with me?”
“Not just you, all delvers. You don’t store the magic to use it. You don’t absorb it
from the land, sea and air. Well, I shouldn’t say that, that’s not exactly true. You have the
ability to be a magic caster, I’ve told you that before. You could use the magic in spells,
but that’s not what I’m talking about. I’m talking about the abilities that make you a
delver, those qualities that set you apart from other races. Didn’t you ever really stop to
think about how you can do the things you do? It’s magical power, but you don’t cast it.
You are born with it. The magic is a very part of you, like your skin.”
“You’re kidding right?”
“How else would you explain the way you move, how you can travel so far so fast and
without tiring the way no one else in the land can?”
“Elves can move pretty quickly,” Ryson offered.
“You and I both know an elf is no match for a delver in what we’re talking about.”
“But elves are quicker than dwarves and humans.”
“Indeed they are, and the magic affects them differently as well.” Enin shook his head
as if flustered. He was not making his point as well as he wished. “To a degree, you are
right. Elves are also born with the magic within them. That is why elves can do the things
they do. They move lightly and quickly, see for great distances, so yes, you are right. I
shouldn’t have been so quick to dismiss that. Elves are born with the magic, but not quite
like delvers, not to the same extent, that’s what I meant. Delvers are born with a great
deal of magical energy inherent in their bodies. It doesn’t have to be used as spells, but it
gives you certain powers—ah abilities.”
Ryson frowned for a moment as he continued through his own path in the forest. “If
all this is true, then why didn’t the sphere wipe out the elves and the delvers when it was
created by Ingar? I’m not talking about the poison that was killing the elves. I’m talking
about making the magic disappear. Dark creatures disappeared. Magic-casters
disappeared. Why didn’t the delvers and the elves all cease to exist when the sphere
captured all the magic and was buried in Sanctum?”
“It’s like I said,” Enin answered, “the sphere could only capture free magic and it
captured every shred of free magic it could. The magic that is within delvers, and to a
lesser extent within elves, is never free. It is created at your birth and stays within you at
all times. Dark creatures need free magic in the air to remain in this realm. Magic-casters
need to capture and absorb magic to continue casting spells. Delvers and elves don’t need
magic free across the land to exist in this realm, but that doesn’t mean the magic isn’t part
of them.”
“So you’re saying I’m a magical being.”
“That is exactly what I’m saying and exactly why I’m trying to determine if I could
cast a spell that would allow a non-delver to move as a delver.”
“You want to duplicate me?”
“Not you,” Enin explained, “just your powers. Now where was I?” The wizard floated
back up to a higher level to watch the delver move from a different perspective without
having to worry about crashing into a tree. He began speaking about spells again as if he
never departed from his earlier thoughts. “You flow like water, but even that’s not a fair
assessment. Water is fluid and thus its movements tend to be loose in scope and direction.
Still, when you splash water, droplets can dart in well defined paths. If I were to include
water qualities in the spell, it would have to be that of a well defined stream as opposed
to a massive wave. Perhaps more ice than water.”
Enin suddenly grumbled with frustration. “This is most perplexing. I believe I can
easily simulate part of the things you do with one spell, but that would represent only a
small portion of your delver qualities. I could give someone speed, and maybe stamina,
but not the same grace. I could give balance and athleticism but not the same awareness
of the surroundings. No, to duplicate your abilities with any degree of accuracy, it would
require a series of spells and most likely they would have the affect of canceling each
other out.”
“I guess if you need the skills of a delver, you’ll just have to call on me. Just won’t be
able to conjure one up by waving your hand over some bug or something. Shame.”
“It is indeed a shame. Your movements are quite extraordinary. To duplicate them
would allow for transportation methods that might be unheard of. Imagine if we could
give a team of horses the movement capabilities of a delver. Think of it.”
“I think I’d rather fly,” Ryson responded.
Enin shook his head strenuously. “Horses flying? No, that would not be a good thing.”
“Not the horses, me. I’ve watched you cast that flying spell and I’ve always been
envious.”
“The way you move and you are envious of me?” the wizard asked revealing a great
deal of surprise.
“You can fly, so yes I am. I always wondered why you don’t cast that spell on others.
You know, allow some of the guard at Burbon to fly around on patrol. They could scout
the area better.”
“I can’t cast it on someone else. It’s purely a matter of control. The spell is almost
constantly and instantaneously altered with my own thoughts and movements. It has to
be. If I cast it on someone else, the results would be disastrous. Now I can make you
float, and I can move you from one area to another by levitating you, as long as you don’t
resist me, but I can’t give you the same power of flight that I have right now. As I said,
the spell requires constant and instantaneous updating. The moment you wanted to move
in a new direction and the spell wasn’t corrected properly for that desire, you’d probably
end up rocketing beyond the horizon.”
“That would be bad.”
“Indeed, like horses flying,” Enin added.
Ryson shrugged. “Ok, so I can’t fly, doesn’t mean I don’t want to.”
“But you can fly.” The wizard offered without a hint of doubt. “Not with a flying spell
like I do, but if you want to experience the sensation of flying, that can be done under
your own power.”
Ryson pulled to a slow stop. “Explain that one to me. You’re telling me I can fly?
Like a bird?”
“Almost exactly like a bird, and I can show you as long as you understand you must
adjust your perception.”
“Once more, explain please.”
Enin looked about the landscape over the trees. He quickly spotted an area that suited
his purpose. He pointed in that direction as he called down to the delver.
“Ok, I need to move you to open ground. There is a nice area over to the Southwest.
Do you want to run there or should I levitate you there?”
“I’ll get there myself,” Ryson stated with certainty. “When you levitate me, I always
feel like I’m about to be dropped on my head.”
“Hmmph. I would only drop you if you resist me. I could transport a hundred people
or more at once if I had to, as long as they just allowed me to move them. Nobody likes
being moved, though, and they always complain. They start fighting it and then they start
falling. It’s not me, it’s them.”
“I’ll meet you there,” Ryson stated with a degree of finality.
“Fine.”
Ryson took off in a blur and stopped in the middle of a clearing. He looked over the
level ground that extended on a wide path beyond the edge of a nearby stream. He
realized it was a flood plain which would explain the lack of trees in this localized area.
The ground was hard, mostly frozen from the colder night temperatures. A few areas
thawed slightly from the midday sun, but even these patches remained firm. For the most
part, the ground was comprised of matted down, dormant high grass. Several rocks
littered the area, but not enough to worry about.
Enin flew into the clearing and down closer to the delver as there were no longer any
trees to impede his path. “Now first, you have to remove all expectations of what you
think flying will be like. Can you do that?”
“I can try.”
“Well, try hard. Next, survey the surroundings so you have a good idea of what you
are going to be running over.”
“I thought I was going to be flying, not running.”
Enin sighed in exasperation. “You’re not trying very hard.”
“Oh, sorry. Anyway, I already gave the ground a once over. Looks clear to me.”
“Excellent. Now, I need you to set yourself up at one end of the clearing so you have
the entire expanse available for one straight run. Move over to the far northern border of
this clearing and face south.”
The delver complied with a blur of motion and within a heartbeat stood at the far
northern end of the clearing, facing south toward its full expanse.
Enin shouted even though the delver’s keen hearing would have allowed him to hear
Enin whisper from even this greater distance. “I’m going to cast a wind spell, a small
one. It will only create a constant rush of air that will flow into your face. I’m doing that
not to give you extra lift or anything like that, so don’t try to float on the breeze. I just
want to make sure you have the sensation of wind in your face. After I cast the spell, I
want you to run into the wind, but not like a delver. I want you to run with long bounding
strides that send you as much upward as they do forward. I want you to run with timing
as well, one…two…three… at that pace. It has to be slow, smooth and steady. Do you
understand?”
Ryson nodded.
“While you run, I want you to put your arms out to the side. Don’t flap them or
anything silly like that. You’re not a bird, so don’t act like one. Simply hold them up, but
beyond that, keep them relaxed as possible. Ready?”
Ryson nodded again.
With that, Enin flicked his wrists and two perfect circles of white energy appeared at
his palms. He whispered a few inaudible words and pressed his hands outward. The two
circles of energy flowed out toward the delver, collapsing into the air as a stiff breeze
now pushed forward in their place.
When Ryson felt the flow of air, he did as the wizard asked. He ran due south directly
into the wind. His legs pressed him both forward and upward in what appeared to be a
slow dash of one leap after another. He stretched his arms out to his sides, but kept his
muscles relaxed. As he continued through the clearing, he waited to be lifted high up into
the air. To his disappointment, he never left the ground. When he reached the boundary
of trees at the far end of the clearing, he turned back to Enin.
“What went wrong?”
“Nothing went wrong, that is to say, nothing beyond your perception of what was to
happen. You expected to be soaring above the trees like a bird, yes?”
“Yes.”
“I didn’t say you had the power to soar above the trees, I said you had the power
within you to realize the sensation of flying. If you consider what you just did, and what a
bird does, you’d realize that you felt what it’s like for a bird to fly. A bird must flap its
wings to gain lift and momentum. As it lifts in the air, it can soar for distances without
flapping its wings, but it still must work to some extent to remain airborne for any length
of time. Instead of flapping wings, you propelled yourself with your legs. You left the
ground and remained in the air until you came back to the ground and propelled yourself
up once more. It’s the same concept as flying only in shorter bursts and lower to the
ground.”
“Well, that’s disappointing to say the least,” Ryson stated with a dissatisfied tone.
“Disappointing? Nonsense. As far as sensation goes, it is all the same. Perception,
that’s all that’s different, but you can change your perception. With the wind in your face
and your legs pressing you forward, you feel what the bird feels. As that same wind
rushes past your ears, you hear what the bird hears. As you look to your left and right and
see the landscape pass you by, you see what the bird sees. If instead of the clearing you
ran through the trees, you would know what its like for a bird to soar through branches.
Perception! Focus on it. Understand that what you are doing is no different then what the
bird is doing. The bird is simply lighter so it can stay off the ground longer. It can beat its
wings against the air while you must press your feet against the ground, but in those
moments that your feet have propelled you off the ground and into the air, you are truly
in flight. It may only be for scant moments, but for those moments, as brief as they are,
you are as the bird. Perception.”
Ryson frowned.
Enin, however, would not give up. “Give it a try one more time and free your mind of
your expectations as I first asked of you. Feel the wind in your face and look about you
all at once. When you leave the ground, focus on that very instant—not on what will
happen next, not on the fact that you will eventually land, but on that instant that you are
in midair. When you think too far in the future, even a mere instant in the future, you
know you will fall to the ground. If, however, you can focus on a single instant in the
present, then you will not care about what will happen next. You will only know what is
happening now. You are in the air, you are moving, thus you are flying!”
“Alright, I’ll give it a try. It’s just not what I expected.” With that Ryson turned and
took off once more. He concentrated on the moments he was in the air. He felt the wind
in his face and across his outstretched arms. At the very moment he was at the peak of his
elevation off the ground, he finally began to realize what Enin was saying. He was
airborne. He was moving forward. He was, in a fashion, flying.
Enin smiled from a distance and cast another quick spell. This time the air did not
move, but the space around the delver shimmered ever so slightly. The delver appeared to
be caught in suspended animation, but only for a moment. The shimmering effect quickly
dissolved and Ryson again was moving as normal.
“Whoa!” the delver shouted. “What did you just do?”
The wizard smiled broadly. “Let’s see, how would I describe it? It was kind of a
floating dimension spell, no, actually more like I suspended time around you. Well, that’s
not really it either, because time always marches on. However, you know when an
important event is about to happen and everything sort of slows down around you? Well,
that’s what I did for you. That way you could really appreciate that moment you were
gliding across the air, flying if you will.”
“Seemed like I was flying forever there for a moment,” Ryson replied almost gleefully
as he turned and raced back toward the wizard.
“Barely a few moments, actually, but in your mind those moments were extended.
You were able to think and react and even move as if everything else around you was
placed in a state of slower motion.”
“Thank you very much, that was more of what I expected. It really did feel like I was
flying.”
“Only because you allowed yourself to perceive beyond what you thought you knew.
When I saw that, I knew you were ready to experience the sensation.”
With those words, Ryson suddenly stopped in his tracks. He stood stone still as his
eyes narrowed and his chin lifted slightly into the air.
The delver’s reaction was not lost upon the wizard and Enin immediately tried to gain
Ryson’s attention. “Can I ask why you are doing that? Well, I know why you’re doing
that, you’re sensing something. That’s obvious, but what is it that you think you’re
sensing? Can you describe it?”
At first Ryson appeared to ignore the wizard, he continued to tilt his head from one
side then to the other. His eyes would not fix on anything in the distance and he did not
bother to sniff the wind. Instead, he simply moved his head slowly about as if the skin on
his face could catch something very elusive in the breeze, like a single strand of a spider
web caught on his brow. Finally, he spoke without looking toward Enin, without looking
toward anything at all.
“I don’t know… I really don’t. It’s something magical, that’s about all I can say for
sure.”
Enin began to question Ryson further, but caught himself and stopped. He grunted
about something inaudibly until he finally spoke with almost guarded words. “I’ve seen
you like this before over the past few days. The fact that you say it’s magical is a serious
consideration. I’m most curious about what you think is the source of this sensation.”
“I don’t know what to tell you,” Ryson offered. “Ever since the sphere was destroyed,
I’ve always felt the magic. It was new to the land, basically it still is. It seems to be
everywhere and sensing it is a feeling I am getting used to, but this isn’t quite the same.
It’s powerful, powerful but deceptive. Sometimes I think its hiding, then again I find that
hard to believe. I actually believe that whatever it is, it knows I can sense it right now.
Still, it doesn’t care; doesn’t try to mask itself beyond whatever it’s doing to keep in
secret as it is. I know that doesn’t make sense.”
“No, that I can understand. Keep going. What else do you feel?”
“Well, what I feel is difficult to put into words. Dry. That’s what comes to mind. Not
dry like the desert or dry like thirsty, but still dry. At first I was going to say dread, but
that’s not really it. When you dread something, you know it’s coming and you hope it
doesn’t. Dread is heavy suppressing. This isn’t the same. This is more empty than heavy,
but then again empty doesn’t quite explain it either. I keep coming back to dry.”
“I see.” Enin wanted to ask more, but his own attention was quickly pulled in another
direction. With a distinct mutter of dissatisfaction, he quickly turned and peered with
great intent to the Northeast. He lifted his left hand above his shoulder and flicked his
fingers in an odd fashion. Immediately, two snow white circles again danced about his
left hand. They slipped off his fingers into midair, crashed together in an almost powdery
explosion, and disappeared leaving behind a small distortion in the air. Enin focused
deeply into this fist-sized mass of twisted, blurry air.
“Sazar!” he said bluntly. “Must be. Too many creatures to be anyone else this close.
Goblins, a good many of them, a river rogue, a couple of shags, maybe even more than
two, hard to say, a hook hawk, even a rock beetle. Has to be Sazar.”
Ryson spoke out with an even but commanding tone. He wanted to be heard by the
wizard and he wanted an immediate answer.
“Where?”
“Pinesway.”
“You’re sure?”
“Without a doubt. I’ve cast several web spells near areas that might give us advanced
warning of any movement that might affect Burbon. Pinesway always offered itself as a
staging area for some unpleasant creatures. That’s why most of the people abandoned it.
One of the web spells I cast there just sent me a warning. I just cast a sight spell to
connect to it and other web spells I placed in the area. I can see the creatures I described
to you. They are swarming over the town.”
A vision of the monsters raiding Pinesway crashed into Ryson’s thoughts. He didn’t
like what he envisioned. “Can we help?”
“We’d never reach the few that are left in time. The town is mostly deserted, thank
Godson. Those that remain will either escape safely or meet their fate. There’s nothing
we can do.”
“Nothing at all?”
Enin grimaced. “No. I’m sorry.”
Ryson’s hands fell to his sides in clenched fists. “I’m really beginning to hate that
serp.”
Enin heaved another heavy sigh as the bubble of distortion faded before him. “I think
we should get back to Burbon. I need to tell Sy what I’ve seen. I doubt it will be a threat
to us at this instant, but he needs to know. I must ask that you allow me to move us both
together. If you wanted to, you can run faster than I can fly, but I’m not just going to
levitate. I’m going to—hmmmm, how should I say it? The egghead that liked science
might state that I was bending space. If that helps you understand, then I’ll leave it at that.
In essence, I’m going to reduce the distance we have to travel, but we have to move
together.”
“Whatever you have to do,” Ryson allowed.

Intermittent screams of fear and pain echoed through the shadowed alleys of
Pinesway. Tall grass and abandoned carts muffled the sounds in spots, but there was little
else to cover the sporadic sounds of panic. There was no alarm, no shouts of militia, no
bark of guard dogs—no sound of any organized resistance whatsoever. It was during
broad daylight, yet there were no markets full of suddenly panicked shoppers, no offices
filled with curious clerks, and no stalls busy with concerned laborers. As the few but
unmistakable sounds of sheer terror initially blistered through the streets, a light breeze
scattered dust across the empty roads, very little of anything else stirred.
The bulk of Pinesway’s residents abandoned the town immediately after the very first
goblin raid. Those that remained after the initial raid quickly realized that their lack of
numbers now made them an even greater target. When a river rogue staked a territorial
claim at the town’s northwestern edge and shags started making frequent appearances to
the south, even the hardy homesteaders that needed little to scratch a living decided to
leave as well. When the dormant season took hold of the small town, the resident
population was mostly made up of vagrants, petty bandits, opportunistic thieves,
homeless wanderers, and a handful of stubborn citizens that refused to leave their homes
for any reason.
Joel Portsmith was a citizen of the latter. He was considered an old cantankerous man
by his neighbors before the magic returned to Uton. He didn’t care. He didn’t particularly
like people. He worked his whole life at the docks of towns along the western shores. He
saved his money, found a woman that could stand him enough to marry him, and the two
of them eventually moved inland, away from the ocean he never truly cared for. He built
his house with his own hands, and then served as a volunteer in the town’s militia as a
way to defend his home. His woman was killed in that first goblin raid. He buried her in
his backyard when others loaded their carts to run for Connel or some other larger city.
He wouldn’t run—he would stay, no matter what.
Joel let the exterior of his own home appear to be as abandoned as those around it. He
broke boards with nails in them and scattered them around the porch. He didn’t plan to sit
out there as a target for a goblin arrow, so why should he care if the new decorations
made the porch more of a hazard than a pleasant place to relax. He broke the front gate in
a locked position so it was near impossible to move. Only he knew that the section of
fence two posts down to the left could swing open for easy entry. He let the weeds and
grass grow long, nailed shut the windows, and threw broken glass about the front walk.
He pulled the shutters closed and nailed them in place. He left the front door barred from
the inside and out. A walk-down basement door was sufficient for his use, so the loss of
the front entrance was inconsequential.
From the street, his house looked dark, decaying and long devoid of any real care, as if
it had been the town eyesore even before the other residents abandoned their homes. And
that was exactly what he wanted. A clean, well-kept looking house was an invitation to
other less desirable visitors to this town, visitors he had no desire to entertain. Let the
vagrants and bandits choose another home to camp in.
Inside, however, the house was clean and simply organized. He had everything he
needed to survive—warm clothes, utensils, blankets, comfortable places to sit and sleep,
as well as a few diversions such as books, wood carving tools, and a spy glass to keep an
eye on the surrounding streets. Those supplies he would run out of over time—food,
water, and wood for a fire in a small stove that he would only burn at night—these items
he could collect easily from other abandoned buildings in town or from the nearby forest.
Since he didn’t mind being alone, he was content to stay and live with the threat of river
rouges, shags, and goblin raids.
It was from inside his house that he heard the first indications of the current unrest. He
immediately knew that something very odd was going on outside. He had grown aware of
certain sounds, learned to listen for hints of dark creatures and how these noises differed
from a brigand fight or the mugging of a hapless wanderer. The current commotion
clearly indicated a goblin attack even though the sun was now shining bright and goblins
usually used the cover of darkness. This in itself perplexed Joel, but more ominous was
the combination of additional noises that indicated something much more than a goblin
raid was occurring outside his door.
The shrieking caw of a hook hawk flying overhead could not be dismissed at any time
of day. The fact that it mixed in with the guttural rants of goblins nearby made Joel
cringe. During previous days to pass the time, he had watched hook hawks from afar. He
learned that these flying nightmares particularly enjoyed snacking on goblins, thus
goblins usually scattered when one was nearby. For whatever reason, they were not
scattering now.
The sounds he could currently make out from the goblins in the distance were not the
fearful squeals of disorganized panic as he would expect, but more of war shouts, and
these sounded as if they extended all around the town. That also confused Joel. Goblins
usually ran in, quickly took what they deemed important, and then ran out. They didn’t
take time to whoop and holler. Mixed in with these indiscernible ravings, Joel could
make out the screams of humans. It almost sounded as if the goblins were actually
targeting the thieves that nested in this otherwise deserted place. Shrieks from these
hunted victims continued to grow and Joel began to wonder just what he was up against
this time.
Through past experience, he knew enough when to sit tight and when to move out. It
all depended on the situation and the enemy. Human bandits and thieves that entered the
town with the intent to stir up trouble wouldn’t go house to house looking for valuables,
they were too lazy. They normally appraised targets from the outside. They looked for
sizable warehouses or fancy large houses with grand ornamentation, thus his home was
always ignored. Goblins, however, weren’t as picky.
With goblins, Joel could never be completely sure of their intentions. He watched
them in darkness on several different occasions to assess their tactics. For the most part,
he could predict their movements once he figured out what they really wanted. If they
were just eyeing some finished wood or a cart, they would just take what they wanted and
leave. If they were in search of weapons or tools, they would seek larger buildings, enter,
and ransack the place. Every now and then, however, they would also enter ordinary
residences and come out with blankets, clothes, and even drawers full of useless junk—as
if the piles of worthless scrap actually held some true value. These particular raids were
the most worrisome for Joel, because if Goblins simply wanted to collect odds and ends,
they might enter his house if they happened to turn up his street. These were the times
Joel would not allow himself to be caught trapped inside with no way of escape.
The problem Joel now faced was that he simply could not fathom exactly what was
going on outside from the confusing sounds he was hearing. People were dying, of that
he was sure. That disturbed him as he never encountered the goblins actively hunting
down the remaining residents of Pinesway. Shags and the river rogue did their share of
hunting, but not when a hook hawk was screeching above in the day-lit sky.
Joel peered out a broken slit in an upstairs shutter with his spyscope hoping to gain a
better perspective of what was going on outside. He saw little that made him happy.
“Blasted goblins are moving in coordinated patterns,” he grumbled to himself. “OK,
they’re not raiding the area, they’re securing it. What the blazes are they up to? And a
shag standing right next to them with a hook hawk overhead! Not good.”
Joel didn’t need to see anymore. This was not the time to risk sticking it out in his
home, it was better to be on the move. With a decision made, he did what he always does
before he opts for different ground. He hid his most important supplies under loose
boards in a dark corner of an empty bedroom and more behind a fake wall of the back
closet. He surveyed the area making sure that nothing of any value appeared in sight. He
threw a dusty, old, moth-eaten blanket over one chair and tipped another one over on its
side. He scattered some broken glass he kept in a jar across the floor and table top and
quickly climbed down the stairs into the cellar.
When he reached the large tin door that opened upward to the back yard, he realized
he was now in a bit of uncharted territory. He never made this type of move in daylight
before. Streaks of sunlight broke through the edges of the door and made long glowing
lines on the floor.
“Blasted bright out there,” he grunted lightly to himself. “Ok, how to do this without
being seen?”
He knew where he wanted to go first, and he went over the path he would take in his
mind. He believed there would be sufficient cover of overgrown hedges that would block
sight of him from street level. The goblins would probably not see him. The hook hawk,
however, presented another problem. If the bird decided to circle back in his direction,
there were not enough trees to cover his position and the trees that were there were
devoid of all leaves.
“Ok, not much choice,” he muttered.
With that, he opened the door. A breath of cold air crashed into his face as he crept
outside making one quick swooping glance of the skies overhead. Thankfully, the hawk
was not in the area. Immediately but as silently as possible, he moved to his left and his
first objective, an abandoned house two doors down that looked as bad as his own home
from the outside. He crawled through a hole in the wall that he himself had cut with an
axe. He had placed that same axe, as well as a long dagger, swords of various weights
and lengths, and a crossbow with plenty of bolts in a hidden cache in this house’s
basement.
Now in the cover of the interior of the house, Joel moved with more speed as he
bounded across the bare floor to the basement door and down the creaky stairs. He turned
at the bottom and scrambled noiselessly over to a cobweb covered corner. What the eye
could not see was a shallow pit because he had covered it with splintered boards. A few
large, hairy spiders darted across the planks as he began to disturb the slightly rotted
wood. He was never afraid of such insignificant creatures and brushed them away as if
they were nothing more than lifeless dust balls. Carefully and quietly, he moved the
boards off to the side revealing several sacks and blanket-wrapped mounds. Along with
the weapons, the pit contained several other useful supplies such as torches, flints, oils,
and armor of different types.
Joel, almost without thinking, picked up one of his more useful inventions. It was a
spiked forearm brace. Made of leather, he could bind it around the lower part of his
forearm, covering the entire area from the lower elbow all the way down past the wrist
just to the bottom of his palm. The brace was covered with small razor sharp spikes that
nestled themselves in rows and jutted out in various directions. He designed and
produced the arm covering himself as a way to deal with what he previously viewed as
the greatest threat to his safety. That threat was in the shape of human thieves that might
fall on him when he was on a supply run. He had witnessed several attacks occurring
throughout the town when the bandits first showed up to take advantage of the fact that
lawlessness was now the rule.
With his spyscope, he watched muggings and beatings from his house. The thieves
would jump an isolated wanderer rummaging through debris in back alleys. As they
outnumbered their target, two or more of the robbers would always grab for the victim’s
arms while the one in charge took advantage of the situation. Beatings were often vicious
and Joel vowed never to be victimized by such a ploy. He created this armband as a first
line of defense.
More than once when he had ventured out of his house for supplies, he had been set
upon by brigands that meant to separate him from any useful equipment. As they did to
their other targets, they encircled him and rushed him from the sides. Once upon him,
they always tried to grab him by the arms. When they did, they were not happy.
Joel would begin to twist and pull his arms with the makeshift leather sleeves bound
around each forearm, apparently trying to wrest his hands free. Nothing was further from
the truth. He wanted the moronic bandits to grab even tighter, which they often did when
he began his struggle. This in turn only aggravated their inevitable injuries. The spikes
would jab into the palms of their hand. Then, when Joel twisted his own arm, the metal
would slice large gouges into their skin. Eventually, they would realize what was
happening and let go, but by then it was too late as their hands appeared more like raw,
battered meat. While they stood gaping at their own wounds, Joel showed no such
hesitation and used the same armored forearm to smash them in the face.
With the underlings out of the fight, it was then a match between Joel and the lead
thug, the one that always waited for the others to move in first, the one that enjoyed
beating a helpless victim. While Joel was usually much older than any such bandit leader,
he was also always more in control and better trained. Joel rarely showed mercy.
On this day, however, Joel wasn’t facing a group of thieves. He was facing goblins
and he hoped none would get close enough to get a hold of him. Still, he wrapped one
brace around his right arm, but decided to leave his left arm open for a sleeve that would
hold additional bolts for his crossbow. He also tied a belt around his waist with another
two holds on each of his sides for even more crossbow ammo. From what he saw at his
window, this was an enemy he wanted to fight from a distance. A sword or dagger was
not going to help him and the extra weight would only slow him down.

Sazar stood at the outskirts of Pinesway. A gigantic shag crouched uneasily at the
serp’s side, but it made no attempt to join the carnage or kill the goblin that stumbled
dazedly toward them.
Sazar did not wait for a report, he already knew what had transpired. In essence, he
was seeing it now from the thoughts of his minions that he controlled and had ordered to
attack this inviting target. He spoke an order to the apparently confused goblin with a
hypnotizing tone.
“Now that we have made our presence known, secure that large building to my right,
the one just past the main road’s entrance into the town. Do you see the one I mean?”
The goblin looked almost bewildered at the serp.
Sazar glared into the goblin’s glassy eyes.
“Point to the building,” the serp commanded.
The goblin did so and pointed to the correct structure.
With that, Sazar nodded. “Very good. Now go.”
The serp took several steps in different directions as he peered across what was left of
Pinesway. He listened carefully to what he could hear and focused on images that flashed
through his mind. These images came from the minds of several goblins. He kept an
active link to their minds throughout this first phase of the battle. His forward assault
force made substantial progress through the town, catching many of the small time
thieves unprepared for the onslaught. The thieves would be killed on sight, their bodies
would eventually be plundered for treasure and weapons once certain strategic points
were secured.
That would occur later, right now he demanded an overwhelming forward movement
by his forces, a blitz that would take a U-shaped form around the edges of the town and
eventually swing around the back end. When this was accomplished, he would have
Pinesway encircled and escape cut off.
As Sazar contemplated the initial progress of his assault, he grinned with appreciation.
The screams he heard in the distant matched the bloody images that flashed through his
mind. His goblins moved forward unopposed, not that Sazar expected any opposition. His
hook hawk scouted the town for many days before this assault. He knew Pinesway held
little more than riffraff and thieves—the dregs of human society that would not stand and
fight but rather flee from a superior enemy. The ensuing panic that now gripped this town
confirmed his assumptions. These thieves posed no real threat to him or his minions.
These same humans, however, collected the spoils of looting escapades over many
weeks, and Sazar knew the value of obtaining this treasure. This is why he targeted this
abandoned town in the first place. The human bandits did the work for him, pillaging
empty houses, plundering town stores, attacking wayward travelers that stumbled
unaware into this place and relieving them of their valuables. Sazar now coveted these
valuables. They could be sold and traded to other unscrupulous humans for the tools and
weapons his minions lacked the talent to create for themselves. He could buy food that
would entice other dark creatures to his side, close enough for him to weave his mind
controlling spell over them and increase the size and power of his army.
Mostly, however, he wanted Pinesway for his own. The buildings would serve as
suitable quarters for a multitude of goblins that he could keep close by. If he could keep
the goblins fed and near his presence, then he could maintain control over them. It was
when they were scattered, when his minions ventured too far in the distance, that was
when his hold was least tenable and when he lost most of his troops. By utilizing
Pinesway as a headquarters, he could keep this from occurring. Goblins by the hundreds
would flock to his town for free food and shelter and ultimately to serve him. That is why
he now stood at the entrance of this place that the humans abandoned.
“All goes well,” the serp snickered. “The humans panic and they run for cover. They
stupidly run for the sanctuary of their own hidden shelters. They will lead us to the
supplies they looted for themselves. In the very chaos I create, I will obtain all that I
want.”
He snickered again as he moved toward the building he ordered the goblin scout to
secure. He motioned for the massive shag to follow as he inhaled the smell of blood and
terror in the air.
Sazar found the chaos invigorating. He didn’t need order to control his minions—just
the opposite. Unfettered chaos held great advantages for him. The pandemonium kept
those under his control from ever clearing their minds, not that the minds of goblins,
shags or the other monsters under his control could ever be accused of being complex.
Still, simplicity led to simple desires as well as simple fears. Desires offered one stimulus
and fear another. Chaos kept these dark creatures from seeing a clear path to their own
needs, kept them from wiping away the confusion that cluttered their dark, twisted minds,
and it fed the fear that made them easier to control.
The human targets of his raids also felt the fear of chaos. With shouts and cries ringing
from every corner, with screams of terror filling the air just as the smoke from
surrounding fires, few of the remaining humans in this town would organize into a
dangerous party. Instead, they would cower in dark corners or run in panic, and thus
create more confusion and feed the frenzy.
The only real difficulty with such turmoil was keeping the hook hawk from grabbing
goblins as prey. Hook hawks with their gnarled talons and bent necks flew more like
swirling boomerangs in a tornado. Their curved bodies allowed them to circle and swerve
with razor quickness and they easily snatched that which moved in the same type of
haphazard frenzied direction. Those that ran in straight paths could often avoid a hook
hawk, but goblins tended to run in mindless patterns and were thus the perfect prey.
Still, it was good to get a high overview of any skirmish, and Sazar could see what his
minions saw. The loss of a few goblins here and there was small enough sacrifice. The
hook hawk circling above gave him the perfect perspective for ascertaining the overall
movements and progress of his ground born forces.
Far better than the hook hawk, however, was the perception he gained from the rock
beetle under his control. Now here was a creature that Sazar truly appreciated. The rock
beetle did not rely on sight as it spent most of its time just under the surface of the
ground. Rock beetles utilized their other senses. They could pick up a scent that
originated from a great distance even when it had to be absorbed through layers of soil.
And smell was not the only sense that was heightened to compensate for the beetle’s dark
underground world. They could isolate and distinguish sounds that most other animals
could not even perceive. When linked with a rock beetle, Sazar could hear well beyond
even what a hook hawk could see.
A rock beetle, however, did more than just hear sounds. It felt vibrations, felt them
like a spider feels a victim trapped in its web. The beetle could sense movement in all
directions and at distances almost too far to believe. The ability to seize upon this
incredible sense allowed Sazar to actually physically experience the battle as it occurred,
and this was beyond invigorating.
Through the beetle, Sazar felt the forward movements of his own minions as well as
the horrified retreat of those humans still in Pinesway. Beyond that, the beetle’s senses
actually allowed Sazar to sense the pulse of the battle. It was more than smelling, hearing
or feeling. It was a deep perception of tremor and vibration. The serp became aware of
the twang of each goblin crossbow, the thundering step of his shags, and every dull thud
of a human body that crumbled to the ground in pain and agony. These palpable
sensations allowed him to actually taste the crippling fear and chaos as he placed these
sensations in context with the images that flashed in his mind.
“This is turning out to be a delightful day,” the serp hummed in enjoyment as he
stepped up to the building he had previously pointed out. He stepped inside past two
other goblins that stood guard at the door. These creatures instinctively backed further off
to the sides when the hulking shag tried to enter.
The hairy monster was not meant to enter human sized buildings and it twisted,
turned, crouched and bent in an attempt to fit through the door. The wood of the frame
began to crack and splinter.
“Stay outside,” Sazar commanded. “Wait at this spot and do not move from it.”
The shag immediately ceased its efforts to obtain entry into the building and stood like
a statue just outside the now somewhat mangled door frame.
“This will serve as my lair until a more appropriate setting is discovered and secured.
For now it will suffice.” Sazar then turned to the goblins that waited at the door. “Patrol
the exterior of this building continuously until I tell you otherwise. Do not engage in any
battles or attempt to loot any buildings. Simply circle this building over and over and
watch everything that is in your view. Go.”
Sazar quickly mouthed a spell and a gray, misshapen, jagged star of energy appeared
above his head. It crackled with energy and then dissolved, but he now had an even more
direct link with the two goblins that patrolled his new home. His spells were usually weak
and the magical energy he could draw on to cast them was limited, but certain spells
could assist him in maintaining a better level of security. With this new spell, his link
went beyond the fact that he could see what they see. Now, he was linked to their
instincts as well. If they felt threatened, he would feel threatened.
Turning his attention back to the battle, he voiced new commands that he sent
telepathically to his reserve minions waiting at the outskirts of town. He commanded
them to enter the town and reinforce the forward goblins and fall into positions at several
cross roads. He would seal off this section of town in mere moments and press his
goblins further around the edges of Pinesway. It wouldn’t be long before he had the town
surrounded with his forces.

With a crossbow draped over his back and a leather chest guard snapped securely to
his upper body, Joel took back to the basement stairs and bounded up to the ground floor
of the house that stored his cache of weapons. He quickly moved to the hole in the wall
where he entered the house, but stayed clear of the opening. He pulled out his spy glass
and peered through it.
“Nasty buggers are closing in on me,” he mumbled to himself. “Ok, don’t want to get
caught in here, but need a plan. Blast, need to know what in blazes is going on is what I
need. Blasted creatures never attacked like this before.”
Through the spyscope he could see groupings of goblins making coordinated
movements up several different streets. When they reached a crossroad, they secured
each corner and then waved to their flanks. Immediately, another group of goblins would
then appear and press forward beyond their position.
He watched with great concern toward the goblin efficiency when he witnessed the
goblins force a young human male out of hiding from an old merchant’s store. Crossbow
fire took out the victim’s legs first. When he crumpled to the ground, three ran up to him
and took hold of the arrows that stuck out of his thighs. When he tried to pull away, they
twisted the arrow rods over, causing apparent agony in their victim. A fourth goblin took
hold of the victim’s head, mouthed something that Joel could not make out. The victim
shook his head. With that, the fourth goblin jabbed a dagger in the young man’s throat.
With the man gurgling blood in death throws, the four goblins released him and left him
to die in the street.
Joel grimaced as he considered his own plight. “Ok, they’re cleaning out buildings.
They’re not taking prisoners and it won’t do to be forced out into the open. Can’t stay
here, and just can’t run without knowing what I’m running toward. Ok, one step at a
time.”
He poked his head out the hole in the wall and looked skyward. He could hear the
hook hawk screeching in the distance.
“Other side of town. Good.”
Joel did not waste the chance. He extricated himself out of the hole, kept to the side of
the house, and rounded the back corner. He then sprinted as fast as his old legs could
carry him across the small back yard to a hedge that served as a natural fence. He dove to
the ground and rolled deep into the overgrowth of weeds. With the hedges and weeds
serving cover, he took out his scope once more.
“Ok, think this thing out,” he whispered to himself. “Don’t want to get trapped in a
building, shags can smell me out if I try to hide. Can’t just keep moving in the open, hook
hawk will make it back here eventually. I can break for the woods, but no telling how
many goblins are waiting in the trees. Blazes, not a good choice to make.”
Joel shook his head as he considered his dwindling options. “Not leaving, that’s that.
Ok, where to go? Northwest bridge. River rogue there ain’t going to be happy if goblins
try to move into its territory, ’specially goblins with a shag in tow. Probably already
ticked off at the hook hawk flying around so close. Might not be happy to see me, so
can’t let that happen. Still, it’s going to try to fight off any goblins, even the shag. Maybe
the safest place to be. Ok, best I can think of.”
He took a moment to take another look overhead. “Now, how do I get there? Tree
lined paths through the old park and then the cemetery, that’s a good bet. Seems like
goblins are sticking to the roads, just don’t know which roads, sounds like all of them.
Ok, one block at a time. Shortest path to park is that way,” and he nodded his head due
north.
As silently as he could, he pressed aside a series of branches that made up the lower
portion of the hedge in front of him. It was not an easy fit, but he made it through. Once
on the other side of the hedge he wasted no time in jumping to his feet and running to the
back of a newer home that was now in front of him. He clung to the wall and with his
back against it, slid his way to the corner.
This house faced a newer street, a wider street, and with no trees lining either side. It
was open ground and he could hear goblin movements in almost every direction. He had
no idea where his enemies might be at the moment.
“Not going to just trust luck,” he grumbled. He took the crossbow from his back,
loaded a bolt, and aimed at the back of another home a good distance down the road to
his left. “Have to hope they hear the glass and not the sound of the bow. I guess if they’re
close enough to distinguish that, then I’m as good as dead anyway.”
Joel pulled the trigger and watched hopefully as the bolt made a long arc through the
air. The window was a large target but it was far in the distance. It almost seemed as if
the bolt was traveling in slow motion. Thankfully, it hit its mark and the glass shattered.
Joel did not pause to watch through his spyscope. He crouched low, and hustled off in the
opposite direction toward the neighboring house to his right. He bounded around the
corner, down the side and front yards, and finally across the street. He almost expected to
feel the stinging pain of arrows piercing his legs, but he made it to the cover of an
overgrown flower bed and dropped to the ground. He looked up and down the street and
saw nothing. He didn’t know if his diversion made any difference, but at least it felt
better than simply running and hoping for the best.
He had to make it across several more streets closer to the center of town before he
could make it to the park, but thankfully it was quieter here. He could still hear the
sounds of skirmishes in almost every direction, but the alleys he now traveled remained
still. He kept to the sides of buildings and had to dodge for cover twice when he heard the
hook hawk closing in on his position. Eventually, he made it to the park and turned
westward.
Though it was dormant season, the ground here was free of snow and ice. It had been
dry so far this season and Joel was thankful for this. Still, the ground remained hard and
frozen as the sun hung low in the horizon and direct light could not break the shadows of
the thicker rows of trees. Evergreens allowed for greater cover and Joel used them to his
advantage. He made it through the park in quicker time and stopped to gauge his next
path.
A stone fence separated the park from the cemetery. He would have to jump it. It was
only a few feet high, but his body did not look forward to the task. Right now, he felt
every year of his age. His lungs fought harder for air and his lower back throbbed. An
arthritic knee let him know it wasn’t happy either. His hands bled from various scrapes
and cuts, but this wasn’t the time for bandages. He stood under a large spruce and gauged
the distance to the stone wall and then the terrain of the ground beyond.
The cemetery would be open ground around the headstones, not the best place to
travel. The stone wall also stood mostly in open space, but there was enough overhang
from trees in the park to give him sufficient cover there. He could travel the wall along
the park border until it turned at the back end of the cemetery. Along this rear border, the
wall changed over to a wrought iron fence. Most of the fence and back paths were as
lined with trees. Unless the goblins had taken position along the fence, Joel believed a
clear path now existed to the northwestern part of town that bordered the river.
With a little luck he could make it to the north bridge and perhaps find a store house to
hide in. It would be dangerous, basically caught between the attackers and the river
rogue, but hopefully they would all be concerned with each other. Enough different
scents in the air and he might be able to conceal himself until nightfall at least. It was a
good as plan as any.
When he made his first step out from under the pine tree, his plan changed drastically.
The ground rumbled before him and dirt shattered up in his face. He could feel his feet
begin to slip under him in loose dirt. Luckily, his foot caught the stability of a large root
near the surface and he avoided falling forward. He leapt back toward the trunk of the
pine he previously used for cover and grabbed its trunk. The ground continued to crack
and crumble and even more dirt flew into the air. In the next instant, a black as pitch
mound rose up from the ground. It was the rounded, humped back of a rock beetle and it
was looking for a meal.
Joel’s eyes widened in terror as glistening pinchers covered in hair and filth jutted out
from the front of this disgusting creature. Multiple legs pitched the gigantic insect from
the earth as the rest of its body broke from the surrounding soil. Joel didn’t need to see
anymore. He took off back to the other end of the park, hoping he could outrun this thing.

Sazar saw the image of Joel fleeing flash through his mind. The serp continued his
mental connection with the beetle. The old man, however, was not his main concern at
this point. The beetle was needed to ascertain the position of the river rogue that staked a
territory a bit further north of this point of the town. The rogue was not under Sazar’s
control, not yet anyway. Sazar wished to avoid any conflict between the rogue and his
own minions until he had the opportunity to visit the rogue and convince it to join with
them rather than fight. For that, he needed time and more calm surroundings. So, for the
time being, he wanted to pinpoint the exact location of the rogue and isolate it. Perhaps
not totally isolate, as he would throw it a goblin or two for a quick snack and as a gesture
of friendship. With the town now very near his grasp, he would have all the goblins he
needed. Losing one or two to gain a river rogue was well worth the price.
“Forget the human,” Sazar hummed as he directed his thoughts to the beetle. When he
made this kind of direct communication with one monster he would often lose links with
others. It was at this time, Sazar risked losing an advantage of battle as the minds of his
other minions he was controlling would go suddenly blank, as if a curtain had been
pulled. The battle in the town, however, moved surprisingly well and far swifter than he
had hoped. He could spare the momentary diversion.
Sazar could sense the beetle’s hunger and understood what it wanted. “Go north.
Easier meals will be there waiting for you.”
He broke off direct communications with the beetle and established a connection with
two goblins that were very near the cemetery. “Leave the cemetery and go north about
two blocks. Wait there and don’t move.”
He then broke off that link and reestablished his focus on the assault forces that were
quickly encircling the town.
“It would have been easier to feed the beetle some human remains, but I don’t have
time to collect them at the moment,” the serp mused to himself. “I haven’t lost any
goblins in the strike yet, so I guess if I lose two goblins to the beetle and two to the rogue
I’ll hardly notice.”

Joel didn’t stop running until he got back to the center of town. It remained quiet in
this area, but now intermittent shrieks of agony pierced the air in all directions. If he had
any hopes of reaching the north bridge, they died with the appearance of the beetle. With
relative quiet at his current position and his back to the wall of some unknown building,
he knew his options dwindled.
“Ok, I’m not getting out of here. Truth is, I pretty much knew that a long time ago. If I
was going to leave, I would have done that weeks ago. Didn’t want to leave then, so why
bother now? Just a matter of where to go.”
He looked back toward the direction of his own home.
“If I’m going to die, then it’s going to be there.”

Lief Woodson stood patiently in the limbs of a very tall oak tree. His eyes scanned the
forest while noting the positions of the elf guards that stationed themselves in
surrounding trees. The dormant season made this endeavor slightly more possible. All but
the evergreens had dropped their leaves. Most of the elite elf guard managed to conceal
their presence well, but those that were forced to reconnoiter wider paths gave away their
position with slight movements.
A muffled breeze pulled in colder air from the north, but because elves, for the most
part, enjoyed indifference to colder temperatures, Lief felt no true chill. If anything, he
welcomed the fresh air that would keep this day crisp and dry. The sun hung low as it
was the season of lesser light, but the sky remained a deep blue and even the penetrating
grey of the woods could not dampen the sparkle of sunlight when it chanced upon
scattered ice trapped within the surrounding branches.
Lief switched his gaze downward upon the members of his camp. For the most part,
they busily moved about the forest floor. Nearly all seemed occupied with other tasks—
collecting wood, mending clothes, crafting weapons or tools. Only one or two of the
camp elders seemed to pay his meeting with Standish Loftber any true mind.
Loftber also stood silently in the very same limbs as Lief, leaning carefully against a
stout branch that angled slightly toward him. His gaze was far off, focused on nothing in
particular. It was almost as if the deep grey of the forest swallowed his consciousness. He
closed his eyes heavily as if garnering his strength. When he opened them, they bore into
Lief.
“Petiole has been delivered to the dwarves of Dunop, as you already know,” the older
Loftber began. “I have no idea whether they will condemn him to death for his crimes or
imprison him in their dungeon for what is left of his life, nor do I care.” This last was said
with near disgust. “I only know he will not be returning and this leaves our camp without
a leader.”
Loftber paused and bowed his head slightly as he corrected himself.
“Actually, without an elder leader,” the Loftber stated almost apologetically.
Lief narrowed his eyes at the camp elder, wondering why Loftber would make such a
gesture. It seemed as if the older elf was almost apologizing directly to him for making a
simple statement of fact. Their camp had no leader now that Petiole was gone. That much
had become painfully obvious in the past few days.
Petiole had been the senior camp elder, the oldest elf on the council of elders with
proper lineage in elflore, and thus the leader of the camp. Petiole, however, was a weak
and foolish elf, an elf that committed the heinous crime of dropping shadow tree seeds on
the underground dwarf town of Dunop. He did this not out of necessity, but out of
resentment, out of ignorance, and out of weakness. Petiole acted out of selfish desires to
prove what was obviously not true, that he was a powerful leader that should be feared or
respected. Now, instead of being revered as he hoped, Petiole was languishing in the vast
underground cave dungeons of the dwarves.
As to the camp being without a leader, that was almost bewildering to Lief Woodson.
Elves lived by tradition, by the guidance of elflore. Such guidance made it clear as to
what should happen next. It was now up to the council of camp elders to rally around
Standish Loftber, the current eldest of elders, and allow him to lead. Something, however,
had prevented this.
While the elders met over the past few days, no indication was given that Loftber
would take the reigns of leadership. Instead, there had been late discussions—not heated
arguments, nor debates of power—just simple deliberations without any clear direction
given to the rest of the camp.
In fact, it appeared as if the council was almost as directionless as it had been when
Petiole had been in charge, and that was something Lief would not allow again. He had
almost said something himself when Loftber called for this private meeting.
It was now Loftber that spoke inquisitively to Lief.
“You look at me with a question on your lips,” the elder elf noted with an expectant
expression.
“The question is not mine to ask,” Lief deferred. “The council must address the issue,
as I’m sure it will.”
“Address it we have, but at the moment we are in a dilemma. This camp needs a
leader. At present, it has none. Well, not a proper leader.”
Lief again offered a puzzled expression to the elder elf and Loftber offered a quick
explanation
“You wonder why I say we have no leader and then correct myself? This camp does
have a leader of sorts, and that leader is you. Please forgive any lack of respect. None was
intended.”
Lief could not remain quiet. His expression revealed surprise, but his tone betrayed
more than a hint of annoyance.
“Lack of respect?” Lief questioned with a near harsh tone. “What are you talking
about? I do not lead this camp. I am not an elder. I am not even on the council…”
Loftber cut him off.
“You are right on the last, but no on the first. You are not an elder, thus you are not on
the council, but you do lead. The elves of this camp now look to you. You are the one
that gives them direction.”
Lief would have stepped back in denial had it not meant him falling out of the tree.
Instead, he had to hold his ground, but he vehemently shook his head in denial. “No, I do
not…“
Again Loftber quickly interrupted. “Please Lief, I am not accusing you of anything
other then perhaps denying the truth you do not wish to see. Hold for a moment and let
me speak what you eventually will know as the truth.”
Lief took a deep breath but acquiesced to the elder and remained silent.
Loftber looked down upon the elves below and nodded to them as he began his
explanation.
“No one, not a single elf believes for a moment that you forced yourself into power,
that you purposefully and deliberately grabbed the role of leadership from the proper
elders. No, you are a victim of circumstance just as this camp is a victim of circumstance.
You are the elf that stood on Sanctum and helped destroy the Sphere of Ingar. Thus, you
are a hero and more. You stood against Yave and helped to stop her. And you were with
Ryson Acumen when he saved Dunop from the shadow trees.”
The elder elf turned his attention back to the forest and looked once more to the trees
in the distance and beyond.
“And it was you that stood up to Petiole and his crimes, stopped another elf-dwarf
war, and sent that criminal to justice. Petiole was an elf elder and the leader of this camp.
His word was final on all matters. When he committed his crimes, you put an end to his
lead. You faced the elf guard, you faced the traditions, and you did what was right and
necessary.
“In less than a full cycle of the seasons you acted more heroically than most of the
legendary elves in elflore. You have a place now with Shayed as one of the most
respected elves in all our history. Yes, you did all these things and not out of a sense of
adventure, or out of ambition. You did all of this because you had to, because
circumstances dictated you do it.”
At this pause, Lief finally spoke.
“I do not deny anything you say, however, I’m not sure of my place in history, but I’m
sure of my place in this camp. Whatever I did, it does not make me its leader. It was
Mappel that directed me during each moment of our trials with Ingar and his sphere.
When Mappel died on Sanctum and Petiole took over, I looked to Petiole to make
decisions to spare this camp. I never placed myself above him. I pleaded with him to do
what needed to be done and still he did not listen to me, thus I never led at any point.”
“You led when it mattered,” countered Loftber. “You led at the end. When Petiole
committed his crime, it was you that stood up against him.”
“I did so, but not as a leader!” Lief stated harshly as he became visibly frustrated. “I
waited for the council of elders to act. I waited for you to act! It was the responsibility of
the elders to stop Petiole. When you failed, I had to…”
“We failed in many of our responsibilities,” Loftber admitted. “I do not flee from that
charge for one single instant. Still, to understand elder leadership is to understand what
keeps us together, what allows us to survive. Certainly there have been poor leaders in
the past, but never one so poor as Petiole that followed one so great as Mappel. We could
not have asked for a worse situation. Mappel was exactly what we needed at the very
time we needed it. Petiole was exactly what we did not need at a point we surely couldn’t
afford to have him. As I said, the circumstances dictated what you had to do, and there is
not a moment I don’t thank all of elflore for what you have done. That is why what I must
do is so much more painful.”
Lief could not hold his tongue and it lashed out with further disbelief in its tone.
“So now you believe me to be the true leader of this camp and you wish to throw that
burden upon me?”
Loftber mumbled barely loud enough for Lief to hear him.
“If only it were that simple,” Loftber sighed.
The elder elf steadied himself once more and again looked into the face of an elf for
which he had the greatest respect and admiration.
“No, I will not ask you to take the role of leader. I had considered it, but it would not
solve the problem. The problem is actually very simple; there can not be two leaders, two
different spokes of authority. An elf camp has to have one clear direction, one clear voice
when the good of the camp is involved. The council of elders serves as advisors, allows
for greater communication, ensures stability during times of upheaval, but it is the camp
elder that leads. Age, health, commitment and elflore have always been the determining
factors in selecting the new camp elder. When a camp elder has passed or becomes too
weak to lead, it is a simple process for the camp to select its new leader. The eldest elf
serving on the council with proper lineage outlined in elflore becomes the new camp
elder as long as he or she is healthy enough to take on the responsibility. Thus, it is
always clear to the camp which elf must lead.”
Lief jumped on this point.
“It is clear now. You are that elf! The entire camp knows that. It is now your
responsibility.” Lief softened his tone. “I know you Standish. You are not Petiole. I have
no fears of your leadership. I know you will serve us all well.”
“And you think that is that?” Loftber shot back quickly. “You will simply retreat into
the shadows and allow me to lead?”
The sharp retort took Lief by surprise.
“You think I would stand in your way?”
“You really don’t understand do you?” questioned the elf elder. ”Leadership is not
simply dependent on the leader. It is also very much dependent on the ones that must
follow. There must be little doubt in their minds about who has the authority and the
responsibility to lead them. How will you make the people of the camp forget you? Will
you simply go out and tell them they should ignore you? Go ahead, for all the good it will
do. In their hearts and in their minds, you have already taken on a position of power in
this camp. If you tell them you will not lead, they will accept that at face value. They will
look to me and follow my direction.”
“Then what is the problem?” Lief demanded.
“The problem is that they will follow my lead for only as long as they agree with my
decisions or as long as we don’t face difficult times. The moment and I mean the very
instant I make a decision which with some might disagree, they will look for an
alternative. They will look to you. That is something we can not have, even you would
agree to that. The magic has returned fully to the land, we are using it to our best
advantage, but we also face so many dangers that we have never faced before. We have
an opportunity for a truly wonderful time or a truly desperate time. We can use the magic
to help our camp prosper, but we also face dark creatures returning in force to our home.
That means we face difficult decisions at every turn. This camp must act with one voice,
one direction, or else we will not survive.”
Loftber’s expression turned more sympathetic as he tried to explain his own
understanding of the dilemma he believed the elf camp faced.
“Again, understand I know it’s not your desire and I don’t believe you would interfere
even if you disagreed with every decision I make, but it’s simply not just up to you. The
elves of this camp now view you as a legend, as part of elflore. The very mention of your
name is now done in the highest regard. You simply can’t brush that away, and in truth, I
wouldn’t want you to. It does, however, mean that you hold an important standing in this
camp. You are regarded not just with respect, but as holding authority.”
Lief took long moments to consider the situation put before him. He looked once more
at the elf guards that stood nearby. It was their job to protect the camp elder, the leader of
the camp. Certainly, they were there to protect Loftber, but were they also protecting
him? Did he now count more than the other elves of his camp?
“I find it difficult to argue with what you say,” Lief allowed. “You are right on many
counts, we do face difficult times and we must have one true leader, one voice that will
direct us all. I suppose for all Petiole’s faults he understood that as well. Perhaps that is
why he acted toward me as he did, perhaps I should have done more to help him.”
“Petiole would have viewed your help with disdain, would have looked upon it as an
insult to his authority.” Loftber interjected.
Lief nodded. “I suppose my help would have simply created greater controversy.”
“Indeed, it would have.”
“The same type of controversy you talk about now,” Lief admitted.
Loftber said nothing, simply looked closely at the younger elf before him.
“So where does that leave us?” Lief wondered aloud. He then stopped and returned
Loftber’s gaze. “I asked you before if you were going to put the burden of leadership on
me and you said it would not be that easy. If you can not lead, and I can not lead, where
does this leave us—a problem with no solution?”
“There is a solution,” Standish Loftber said with more than a hint of sorrow, “a bitter
one, but a solution none the less. No, you can not lead this camp for you are not the camp
elder. You would face the same challenges I would face. The camp will follow you even
during difficult times, probably much longer than they would follow me, but if times
grew truly dark, their loyalties would eventually be torn between following you and
looking to an elder. Elflore is powerful in its guidance to keep us together. If you were to
assume the role of leadership, it would be in stark contrast to the very essence of elflore.
Eventually, even your leadership would be questioned.”
“Then how can there be a solution?”
Loftber answered quickly this time as if he knew he must forge ahead and any delay
would only make it more difficult.
“There can be a solution because it can be possible for an elder to lead. The dilemma
occurs only if you are here. If you were not, there would no longer be a question of
authority. The problem exists only while you are a member of this camp. Do you
understand?”
Lief grimaced as if a sword plunged into his chest, and Loftber continued so as not to
let silence deepen the wound.
“If you leave, this camp survives. If you stay, I and the other elders on the council
believe we will fall into disarray. You will witness the chaos of anarchy as dark creatures
prey on us because we are no longer able to act as one. While it pains me to ask you to
leave, understand that if you stayed you would only witness the destruction of your
camp.”
“So I am to be exiled, and the camp will follow you as the camp elder?” Lief
questioned with an edge of anger beginning to grip his voice.
Loftber answered Lief’s bitterness with somberness of his own.
“It will be a short tenure of leadership. Once I announce that you are leaving the camp
at my request and with your agreement, I will announce that I am leaving as well.”
For a brief moment, any trace of Lief’s growing resentment was quickly replaced with
bewilderment.
“You’re going to relinquish? Then again the camp will have no leader! This is not
making any sense.”
“It makes perfect sense,” Loftber stated with a steadfast determination. “This camp
will have a leader, one leader, and a leader that can not be blamed for sending away the
legendary Lief Woodson just to accommodate his own weaknesses. I will hand over the
camp elder position to the next in line. Shantree Wispon will take over. She will then be
in position to lead this camp with no bitterness, and no question to her authority. No one
will blame her for your departure, and after you have departed, no one will wonder
whether her decisions meet with your approval. I believe she is well suited to handle the
situation.”
“I have no doubts about Shantree’s abilities,” Lief argued. “But that is not the point.
You are supposed to lead, not her. How can you ask me to leave because it will restrict
your ability to lead, and then turn around and avoid what is required of you?”
“Is that it? You think I am simply surrendering my responsibility? No, that is not the
case at all. It is just the opposite. I am taking full responsibility. I see clearly what I am
doing. First, I am asking you to leave your home, to accept banishment as a reward for
your noble actions. You have done nothing for yourself. Your actions saved this camp,
indeed the entire elf race. And now I stand here and tell you to go. I believe you will
eventually understand why I’m doing this, but that is not nearly enough. If I am to ask
that of you, I must be ready to make the same sacrifice myself.
“Think for a moment, Lief. What I ask of you, I feel I must. I do it because I believe it
is the only way this camp will survive. If I stay, then it appears I did if for myself, to
remove you as a challenge to my authority. I will appear as Petiole, weak and selfish. I
could not live with myself. If, however, I accept banishment as well, I will have acted
purely in the best interests of this camp. No one can second guess my intentions. No one
can for one moment believe that I acted to satisfy my own desires. It is the only way for
the situation to truly be resolved. You accept banishment, I accept banishment. We move
on and allow this camp to survive as it has for generations and will for generations
more.”
The elder elf quickly moved to a related matter so as to make his understanding of the
matter as clear as possible.
“There is something else you should know,” Loftber continued. “I will also be asking
Holli Brances to leave this camp. For the very same reasons you must leave, she also
must go. Holli is a guard and is looked at in a different light than you. She went to
Sanctum as part of her duty and she assisted against Yave as a trained member of the elf
guard. Still, she now also has her own place in elflore, a legendary standing. If Shantree
faces difficult times, and I believe she will with so many dark creatures appearing in our
midst, then she can not afford to have anyone in this camp that would be viewed as—
what is the best way to put it—an alternative.”
A cloud of confusion began to swirl in Lief’s thoughts. The bitterness he could almost
taste was growing. It was becoming hard to think and harder still to control his anger. A
sharp question flew from his lips.
“And have you spoken to her of this yet? Have you tried to soften her banishment with
your unselfish decision to leave on your own?”
Loftber paused. He did not like the tone of Lief’s voice and liked even less the raging
glare that was glowing in the younger elf’s eyes.
“No, but I have no doubt she will agree. I am a camp elder, she is an elf guard. She
knows her duty. She will do what I ask, though I believe it will be a greater burden on her
than on the two of us.”
“Duty?” Lief almost laughed at this word. “You wish to speak of duty, the all
encompassing word that will ensure her cooperation? You can say that word to her and
you know she will do as she is told, but you wonder whether or not I will agree?”
“Indeed I do. And that, Lief, is truly an illustration of the problem that exists. If you
do not agree, I can not force you. I could order the elf guard to remove you, but I wonder
if they would actually follow that order. Only an elf guard might be able to answer that,
and I am not ready to put that to the test. The traditions of the elf guard are very strong. I
do not wish to be remembered as the elf that destroyed those traditions.”
With this, Lief tensed. His glare became almost hateful and Standish Loftber could
actually sense the deep anger that boiled in the younger elf. The elder elf did his best to
control the situation and sooth the growing tensions between them.
“As you said, I am the camp elder. You ask me to lead, then I will do so. Any wisdom
I can draw on tells me that I am doing exactly what must be done, no matter how difficult
it is. I take responsibility for resolving the issue before this camp. If you stop me in this—
my first order as leader—then you prove my point and allow the dilemma to continue. If
you realize that instead I am doing exactly what you want me to do, what this camp needs
me to do—to lead, then you will cease your objections. I need you to withdraw from this
camp, to strike out on your own. You are now legend and no one will forget you, but
your final days in this land must be spent elsewhere. Where you go, I leave that to you.
Once you accept this request, I will also withdraw from this camp and will seek refuge
elsewhere. The legend will be gone as will the one that asked him to leave. The camp
moves on without both. Do you really wish to continue to debate this with me and prove
that my leadership means nothing to you and start our spiral to final oblivion? Look upon
the elves below us, see how they all now watch us and understand that there is no other
way.”
Lief, however, ignored the stares from the elves below. He vented his ire directly at
the elf before him, the elf that represented the elders of this camp that did nothing when
Petiole acted so foolishly.
“Words… words of so-called wisdom.” Lief now spoke in a low growl as he tilted his
head downward ever so slightly. He brought his glare of sheer anger directly upon
Loftber. “How long did it take you and the other elders to put together such an eloquent
speech?”
Lief paused only long enough to allow Loftber to open his mouth, but the younger elf
pressed forward before a single utterance could be spoken.
“Where were these words when they were needed? You said you didn’t want to be
remembered as the elf that destroyed the traditions, is that what you are concerned with…
how you will be remembered? Let me tell you how I remember you, as a member of the
camp council that did nothing when we faced our greatest dangers. You now think you
make a grand sacrifice so your name can be placed in elflore? It would be a disgrace to
those that truly belong there if such an attempt was ever made. Here is some truth for you
and the other elders, something for you to contemplate during your self-imposed exile.
You bickered and argued when Petiole led this camp, the lot of you. You showed all the
courage of a yearling deer that bolts at the first snap of a twig. You allowed Petiole to
drop the seeds! Do you hear me Loftber?!! You and the others allowed this to happen.
You knew what was happening and you allowed it! You should all be facing judgment in
Dunop right along with Petiole himself.”
Lief could feel the anger that he swallowed for so long during the reign of Petiole
throb and expand in his head. No longer would he swallow his fury, no longer would he
try to be diplomatic. That would end now. The younger elf stepped forward on the tree
branch that held them both. He stepped so near Loftber that he could feel his breath on
his face. His eyes continued to blaze, but now they danced with a true fury and the elder
elf felt great fear.
Loftber tried to step back, but the limb he leaned upon held him in place. Panic took
hold and to anyone watching it was clear he feared for his very life. Still, the elf guards
did not move to his side.
Lief spoke now with guttural hate.
“I want to repeat this so I know you understand. You allowed the shadow seeds to fall.
You could have stopped it… SHOULD have stopped it. You did nothing! How much less
would you have been responsible if there was another elf-dwarf war? You wish to throw
all the responsibility upon Petiole? It does not work that way. You said it yourself only
moments ago. You said that leadership also depends on the ones that follow. Think long
and hard about that during your seasons alone when you want to consider your so-called
heroic gesture. Petiole made the decision, but the camp elders allowed it to happen.”
Lief took his eyes off Loftber for just a moment and gazed down upon the other camp
elders that were now frozen, eyes fixed upon them both.
“You are all guilty!” Lief roared.
He then turned his fury back toward Loftber. “I would be within my rights to slay you
here and now. In my mind, you are nothing less than a criminal convicted of the most
heinous crime.”
It was at that moment that Holli Brances dropped onto the tree limb.
“Lief!” she spoke in a soft tone, but with no less conviction than if she shouted across
a battlefield. “You must not do this. I cannot let you do this.”
Lief at first said nothing. His body shook as his hands remained clenched in tight fists
at his side. Finally, he turned swiftly about away from Loftber, as if the sight of the elder
elf made him sick. He spoke directly to Holli. “You have nothing to worry about. I have
no intention of wasting anymore energy on this pathetic excuse of an elf, or on any other
elder of this camp. In fact, I’m going to do exactly what he wants, but not because of his
reasoning. I do so of my own reckoning and I do so gladly. Good luck to you Holli,
wherever you might end up.”
Holli’s expression remained stoic and steadfast, but she tilted her head slightly in a
moment of confusion.
“Ask him.” Lief waved his hand in backward disgust toward Loftber, and then he
simply leapt away.

Enin and Ryson landed in the grassy hills just outside Burbon.
“I didn’t want to bring us to the center of town because I don’t like how this spell
affects surrounding space,” the wizard explained. “I didn’t want to send an innocent
passerby into shock if one happened into our path at the wrong moment. It was safer to
land here.”
“I’ll take it,” Ryson said while eyeing the sun in the sky. “It’s about mid afternoon. Sy
should be in his command post. I’ll meet you there.”
With that, the delver exploded in a blur of motion that almost could not be detected by
the wizard’s eye. He blazed a trail to a side gate where he stopped stone still just long
enough to be identified by a tower guard and the gatekeeper. He then moved with slightly
less speed as he darted his way past the wall, through the town streets, and ultimately to
the center of town.
Enin floated up into the air and flew just past a guard tower. He waved with an uneasy
smile before making his way to Sy’s command post by floating above the building
rooftops. When he reached his intended goal, he quickly dropped to the ground and
landed at the front door. He stepped into the office where he saw Ryson already
explaining what he knew to Sy Fenden, Burbon’s leader and Captain of the Guard.
Ryson paused to acknowledge the wizard’s entrance.
Sy appeared grim as he considered the news brought to him by the delver. Still, he had
many questions, and he quickly brought Enin into the conversation.
“Ryson told me what you saw. You used a spell to see Pinesway?”
“Yes,” Enin answered simply without going into an extravagant explanation of the
components of his spell.
Sy was grateful for the short answer, but pursued the topic further. “Do you think
Sazar was aware that you were watching him or his minions?”
“You’re worried he thinks we’re spying on him?” Enin appeared almost ready to
laugh. “There’s not much he can do to stop me.”
“I’m more concerned that we’ve alerted him to our own awareness. I’m not sure what
he’s up to, but it would be nice to know the extent of his own information. What he does,
or what we do in response for that matter, depends on a great many things. So, do you
think he knows about your spell or not?”
Enin reconsidered the question. “Hmmmm… I’d say it’s possible, but not probable. I
would guess not. He’s not that kind of a spell caster that he would be able to detect the
use of magic in that fashion. Those with a higher connection to magical energy can sense
spells. He, however, does not have that kind of connection. That is not where his power
lies.”
“But you said it was possible.”
“Yes, he might have learned a spell that could act as a, how should I put it, warning
system for any directed magic. Problem with that is I don’t think he has the power to cast
such a spell. He could, however, have obtained a magical item that would serve that
purpose for him.”
Sy frowned again. “Alright, since it’s possible then we should probably assume he
knows we are aware of what he’s doing. Tell me exactly what you saw.”
Enin described all the creatures he witnessed, their movements, as well as the reaction
of the few people he could see.
“Casualties?” Sy asked.
“Yes.”
“Can you estimate how many?”
“I only saw a few.”
Sy shook his head. “There aren’t many people left over there. That’s the good news.
The bad news is in everything else you just told me. Sazar has a sizable force of creatures
from your description. The question now is what do you think he wants?”
Ryson interjected at this point. “Whatever he can get his claws on.”
Sy did not totally dismiss the sentiment, but he explained his own considerations. “I’m
sure he’s taking everything he can, but what’s the real purpose of this?” He looked to
both Ryson and Enin with expectation as he spelled out the situation. “This can’t just be a
raid to loot supplies. Doesn’t add up. What he can get from Pinesway, he can get in
different ways. There is no guard or militia to protect the town. In effect, there really is
no town anymore. For the most part, it’s just abandoned buildings and a transient
population. From what my scouts tell me, thieves have done a good job ransacking the
place. Anything worth any value, they’ve already taken. Actually, the thieves and bandits
have pretty much taken the place over, and these people aren’t going to risk their lives to
fight off goblins for an abandoned town. Sazar knows this, so why does he go in there
with a force of that size and actually attack?”
Ryson frowned as he considered the question. “Didn’t think of it like that. Maybe his
goblins are getting restless and he just wants to pacify them with whatever blood they can
draw.”
“Maybe,” Sy allowed, “but I’m not sure it makes total sense, either. I mean if that was
his objective, why not go in at night? Why go in the middle of the day? And why go in
the way he did? From what I’m hearing it sounded more of a coordinated attack. Enin,
you said they moved in with reserves in the back and they were attacking in organized
movements. You didn’t see them just running wild through the streets?”
“No, not wild at all.” Enin then took a moment to consider his own thoughts of
goblins. “It’s interesting actually. Over the past season, I’ve seen some goblins up close,
even threw some harmless spells at them just to see how they react. They’re certainly not
the brightest thing to come over from the dark realm. Actually, in a battle of wits, I’d
probably choose a shag over a goblin any day. Goblins can be sneaky if they want to, no
doubt about that. They have guile and stealth, but they run scared quite a bit as well. They
can organize, but not like a human militia. They rely on great numbers, but they are
inherently distrusting. While they could become a threat if they amassed into a large
army, I can’t imagine the bickering that would take place. From what I saw, they moved
as if directed by a fairly cohesive plan. Yes, I would have to say with little doubt that
Sazar was directing them. That was plain enough for me to see.”
Sy followed Enin’s analysis with more questions. “This is the part that doesn’t add up.
Why would Sazar direct the battle if the goal was to appease the blood lust of a bunch of
goblins? Why not just let them run wild, then reorganize them, take whatever spoils he
could find, and leave? No, I’m not seeing this as just a simple raid one way or the other.
He didn’t have to do it in this way to take supplies, and he wouldn’t have done it this way
to just let his little monsters go on a killing spree. Something else is up.”
“I don’t think it’s going to be that easy to figure out what a serp really wants,” Ryson
acknowledged. He then decided it was time for him to reveal his own intentions. “And
even if we don’t know, I want to go to Pinesway.”
Sy rubbed his chin as he eyed the delver carefully. “You want to go to Pinesway? I
assume you wish to leave now?”
“Yes, waiting doesn’t do any good.”
In truth, the captain was not surprised to hear this. He kept his own emotions buried
as he now pressed the delver for an explanation. “Why do you want to do this?”
“A lot of reasons.” The delver replied almost too simply.
“Can you give me some of them?” Sy asked.
Ryson nodded and spoke openly of why he needed to go. “First of all, Pinesway may
be abandoned, but it’s not completely deserted. We all know there are still people there
that might need help.”
Sy kept his tone even, he didn’t wish to sound sarcastic in any way, but the delver
needed to be told of obvious flaws in this objective. “Noble, but how can you help a
group of people that are wounded or already dead?”
“I can’t help the dead, but if I find wounded, I can get them out of there.”
“And if you find a dozen wounded, you’re going to treat their wounds and get them to
safety? How are you going to manage that? Are you going to carry them all on your back
at once or one at a time?”
Ryson saw where Sy led him and heaved a heavy sigh. “Ok, maybe there’s not much I
can do for the wounded. Maybe I can get them temporarily to a safe place to hide, I can
worry about that when I see what I’m up against. I might also be able to find some that
are neither dead nor wounded, maybe they’re just scared and hiding. We can’t just leave
them there.”
Sy pressed with his pessimism. “While I don’t wish to be coldhearted about this, I
could argue that most of those that are now residing in Pinesway are doing so because it
has been abandoned. They are opportunists that knew the risks. They took over
abandoned homes because there was no one there to stop them. An empty town makes a
good hideout for bandits. These people know how to take care of themselves, that’s what
they’re best at. If they saw a problem coming, they are probably already gone. If not, I
doubt there’s anything left of them to save.”
“Maybe most of the people that were in Pinesway were the type that would take off at
the first sign of trouble, but not all of them.” Ryson noted. “There were a few that just
didn’t want to leave their homes, even if it meant living with bandits and transients, and
having to deal with goblin raids. Remember, I’ve scouted Pinesway on more than one
occasion. There are some people there that just don’t want to leave. I don’t think they
would argue with any help I could give.”
“I can’t argue that,” Sy offered, “but they also knew the risks. They didn’t have to
stay. You have to consider that they are basically now dealing with the inevitable, with
what they knew had to eventually happen. It’s not necessarily your job to help people that
didn’t want help in the first place. But let’s leave that aside for now. I believe there’s
more to this, so tell me why else do you want to go.”
“To scout the area, to see what Sazar is up to, to get an idea of the size of his new
band of monsters.”
“Well, our wizard here has already given us a good idea of that.”
Enin jumped into the conversation without much thought to Sy’s intentions. “I used a
sight spell, but it was connected to the web spell. It doesn’t really see the whole town,
you know, just bits and pieces. A street here, and an alley there, kind of blurry vision of
the whole. It’s probably an accurate count only to a degree.” The wizard put a finger to
his chin as he considered something new. “Now, that’s a thought. I wonder if I could cast
a clearer sight spell, something that wasn’t connected to an object or another spell—a
spell that would allow me to see anything at a particular area. It would be my own vision,
not transplanting images obtained from something else. I’d have to bend light, that
wouldn’t be difficult, but I’d have to bend it there and back, kind of a reflection, but what
would it reflect?”
“While you think about that, let me continue with the delver’s wishes.” Sy turned his
attention back to the delver “As for scouting, my men scout that area every day. As you
just said, I’ve had you scout it several times yourself. You know the condition of the
town before the raid and the lay of the land. As for what Sazar’s up to, we just talked
about that. We don’t have an idea at this point, and let’s be honest, he’s not going to tell
you even if you go right up and ask him. We would still have to guess at that just as we
will estimate the size of his forces. Even if Enin hasn’t given us an exact count of the
number of goblins and shags and whatever else might be involved in this attack, we both
know he’s given us a good idea of what’s out there.”
“Yes, but we also know he has a larger force with him now. That in itself is a bit of a
surprise and getting a better look might not hurt.”
“Actually, I don’t think it is a surprise,” Sy countered. “Think about it for a moment.
We know for a fact that Sazar followed the dwarves into Dunop after they were defeated
here. We have to believe he took a great amount of wealth from Dunop before he took
off. He could use that to buy food and weapons to keep a fair amount of goblins happy
for a while. We also know from Enin that he can control them to a great extent. The more
creatures he controls, the more supplies he can steal. The more supplies he gets the more
goblins he can entice into his camp. One will keep leading to the other.”
Here Ryson spoke with much more certainty. “That’s another reason I want to go. I
know you can’t be happy with what you just said, Sazar growing in strength. I want to
see if maybe I can put a dent in that. If he goes in and strips Pinesway clean, he just gets
that much stronger. I don’t think you want that to happen.”
“No I don’t,” Sy allowed. “I also know that alone you can’t really stop the force that
Sazar is controlling.”
“True, but I’m not going to stop them, just to irritate them, cause them some problems,
let them know that they just can’t waltz anywhere they please without some kind of
resistance. I mean let’s really look at this from a hard perspective. Sazar attacked in broad
daylight. Don’t you think that’s sending some kind of message?”
“I have already considered that, and I’m not happy with it myself.” Sy turned about
and looked at the map on the wall with Burbon at its center. The map illustrated several
strategic points in all the surrounding areas. Hand drawn marks indicated contact with
varied monsters, suspected territories of dark creatures, and paths of travel for goblin
raiding parties. The map drew a grim picture, but other factors existed that could not be
illustrated on this chart and Sy spoke of them openly. “Message or not, daylight or dark,
we have to consider the ultimate truth. I do not believe that Burbon is in any danger from
this attack, and that has to be my first concern. Sazar is not going to hit us even with a
force three times the size Enin described. This town is not abandoned. If he attacked, he
would have to deal with our wall and towers, a trained corps of guards that know how to
fight goblins, a purebred delver that also knows how to deal with an assortment of dark
creatures, and let’s not forget our wizard here. If Sazar attacked us, he would lose
probably his entire force and gain nothing. He’s too smart for that, too calculating, and
that’s the shame of it. So, with a fair amount of certainty, I can say that we’re not his
primary target now or in the foreseeable future. There are, however, several outposts to
the north, farms on the outskirts of Connel, and small villages to the southeast that would
be a ripe target for him. If he believes he can waltz into Pinesway and just take whatever
he wants in broad daylight, then he’s not far from advancing on these other targets as
well.”
Sy turned back to Ryson, but remained frowning. “Still, while I understand why you
want to go, I don’t know yet what you think you’re going to do out there. It’s dangerous
and I know you don’t like killing things. I can’t see you doing any great damage to
Sazar’s numbers if you’re only going to stir up some kind of frenzy. You put yourself at
great risk and I’d like to know what you think you’re going to ultimately accomplish.
This has to have more of a reason.”
“Well, I have no intention of doing some kind of frontal assault if that’s what you’re
worried about.”
“What is you intention?”
“First, I do want to do a quick scout. I think we should get a better idea of Sazar’s
true force and not just base it on what Enin saw in that spell of his. Second, I want to
create some havoc, knock a few goblins out of the fight. You’re right, I have no intention
of killing any, but I can make them run scared, and if they run far enough, they might not
come back. If I stir up enough trouble, I can maybe even cause a shag to lose control. A
shag that takes off after me might also get beyond Sazar’s range and that’s one less
monster the serp has to control. Third, I want to try and remove some of the supplies they
are stealing, remove or destroy, same thing. I can’t carry it away, but I can sabotage a cart
or set it on fire. Finally, I want to send a message right back to Sazar, let him know that I
have my eye on him. Sazar knows me, knows us. You’re right, he doesn’t attack Burbon,
and I think it’s mostly because of our wizard here, but he also knows we are prepared for
him. If I take a quick shot at him while he’s trying to make a strike in a neighboring
town, then he also knows we will go beyond the walls of Burbon to keep him at bay. If he
wants to send a message by attacking in broad daylight, I want to send one right back to
him, one that’s says I’m not impressed.”
Sy nodded and carefully considered what the delver just offered. He could not help
but agree with many of the points. “The truth of the matter is I can’t argue with anything
you just said. I’m not happy that Pinesway is sitting out there so close to us and
abandoned. It serves as an easy target that invites the wrong type of element. Choosing
between thieves and dark creatures doesn’t make me comfortable. That I do not like. I’d
much rather have an empty hillside then what’s there now. I also don’t like Sazar
thinking he can pick off easy victims without risk. He needs to know we’re ready to
counter anything he might throw at us. He seems to be the biggest threat in our
immediate area.”
“So you don’t have a problem with me going?” Ryson sounded almost amazed.
Sy quickly explained. “I have lots of problems with it. It’s risky, I don’t want to lose
you, and you’re outnumbered. But you’re also a delver and I’ve seen what you can do. If
you keep your mind to your business, I doubt they’ll touch you. There are, however,
other considerations.”
“Such as?”
“Such as should I send a contingent of guards as well.”
“They’d only slow me down.”
“It would not be my order to have them accompany you,” Sy explained. “As I said,
I’ve seen what you can do. They wouldn’t be able to keep up and would probably just
end up causing you greater risks. I am thinking, however, of sending them to follow up
after you. If you create the kind of havoc I believe you can, they might be able to clean
up after you, take out several goblins that end up fleeing or a shag that gets separated
form the main group. You might have something against killing these creatures, but I
don’t. It wouldn’t upset me to put a bigger hurt on Sazar.”
“Didn’t think of that,” Ryson admitted.
“Of course, I doubt that will be necessary if Enin decides to go with you. Then he
could probably cause more pain and inflict much more damage then several hundred of
my best men.”
Both Ryson and Sy looked to the wizard almost expectantly. Enin had said nothing
since he began to consider his sight spell. They wondered if he had paid any further
attention to the conversation. His reply made it clear he had.
“Me? Go to Pinesway?” The wizard shook his head with a noticeable grimace. “No,
not a good idea. Didn’t ever really consider it actually. You both know I don’t like
interfering in the decisions of any creature, even dark creatures. There are problems you
have to decide for yourself, work out for yourself, that kind of thing. Kind of hard to
explain really. It’s hard for me sometime, you know. I like to help, but I can’t interfere. If
I start doing everything, then what is there left for you to do? We all have our place and
our jobs. You have to do what you have to do. If I started taking over everything, where
would it stop? It’s really a trap. I don’t want that kind of responsibility, and I don’t really
think most of the people around here would appreciate it. I guess you must think it almost
lazy of me, but that’s not it at all. You do understand, don’t you?”
“Enin, the day I understand you is a day I both fear and welcome, and a day that I
think will never appear.” Sy then turned back to the delver. “I won’t try to stop you from
going, but I will ask you to be careful.”
“I will.”
“Actually, I need you to be more than careful,” Sy added quickly.
“What do you mean?” Ryson turned his head curiously as he waited for an answer.
Sy appeared to take his time in selecting his words. Eventually, he spoke with a
greater tone of concern and less the voice of authority that was his normal manner.
“I know you, Ryson. I know you want to help anyone that’s trapped in Pinesway, but I
also meant what I said before. I know you think everyone is worth your help, and I’m not
going to try and argue that. What I will say is that everyone that is now in danger in
Pinesway is in that danger of their own choosing. They had ample opportunity to leave,
they decided not to. Some came from other towns to stake a claim after most residents
abandoned the place. In my mind, that’s asking for trouble. Now they have it. You want
to do what you can to save them, and I won’t condemn you for trying as long as you also
understand that people have to ultimately take responsibility for their own decisions.
There is a line between doing what’s needed and going too far. I also wasn’t trying to be
obnoxious when I asked how you intended on helping the wounded. It’s not only about
getting careless, it’s also about realizing that sometimes there’s just nothing you can do.
If you don’t accept that, bad things will happen. That’s a plain truth. I don’t want to see
anything happen to you, Enin doesn’t want to see anything happen to you—most of all,
Linda doesn’t want to see anything happen to you. I know your desire to help is just that,
you’re not trying to be a hero. It’s a noble thing to do. What I’ve always worried about is
that one day you might end up being too noble. You want to help, fine, help where you
can, but understand that some risks help no one and can hurt others. We need you back
here.”
Ryson exhaled heavily and did the best he could to reassure his friend. “I’ll be careful.
You have my word.”
Sy offered one more reminder to the delver about the challenges he faced.
“Remember, the people in Pinesway knew raids like this were coming. They still wanted
to stay. Although you might want to, sometimes you can’t save people from themselves.
You have to let them be.”
Enin suddenly offered his own opinion on the matter. He spoke with a greater weight
to his voice as if he wanted to offer a deeper understanding. “What the captain says is
very true. Do not dismiss it, my friend. You can’t save people from themselves, and even
more so, you can’t keep people from their fate.”
Ryson found the last statement too confusing to ignore. “You’re saying that anyone
that dies in this raid was supposed to die.”
“I’m saying there are things beyond our control,” Enin explained almost sternly,
“things that each individual must face on his own. It isn’t always good, but for whatever
reason, it must be faced. We might not like everything that happens, but things happen
for a reason. Keep that in mind. It will serve you well both now and in the future.”
“Not sure I understand that, not even sure I want to,” Ryson admitted. “Anyway, I
need to leave now. I should hit Pinesway before the sunsets and I’ll be back here before
the sun rises. Linda thinks I’m out on a scout with Enin so she won’t expect me back
until late tomorrow anyway. She doesn’t need to know or worry, so I’d appreciate it if
you didn’t tell her where I’m going.”
“She won’t see me,” Enin declared. “I’m returning to my house, there’s something I
need to look into myself. I’ll be busy for sometime.” Enin paused to take a deep look at
the delver. He then took a small jewel from his pocket. “You’ll be fine, but if you need
help, really need help, hold this tight in your palm and think of me.”
Ryson took the gem and held it loosely in his hand. If felt near weightless and he
couldn’t identify it. Its color changed with each passing moment. “Never saw one of
these before. What kind of stone is it? It’s not a ruby, diamond, or emerald.”
“It’s not a natural stone. I made it. If you need me, however, it will tell me. That’s all
that’s important. Good luck to you.” Enin said no more, he simply walked out the door.
Sy looked from the stone to the delver to the door that Enin walked through. “I may
not understand him, but I think I am actually getting used to him. And I know I thank
every day that he’s here with us.” Sy turned his attention back to the delver. “Anyway,
just so you know, I am going to send men to the outskirts of Pinesway. I’m not going to
order them into town, but they will have orders to strike any group of dark creatures they
can handle safely. Any stray goblins that try to leave or enter are not going to have an
easy time of it. They’re also going to warn any travelers and help any stragglers that have
escaped the town that make it to the open roads. Keep that in mind for yourself and
anyone that you meet up with. You won’t be completely alone.”
Ryson looked once more at the stone in his hand and then deposited it in his own
pocket. “I guess not. Thanks. I’ll see you tomorrow.”
With that, the delver dashed out of the office.

“Hello, brother.” The voice that greeted Enin filled the air with emotion, and this
emotion spanned the spectrum of feelings. It held joy drifting toward anger, happiness
betrayed by sadness, enthusiasm cut off by indifference. The inhabitant of this otherwise
hollow region made no attempt to temper the tone of his voice. Instead, he allowed the
opposing passions of these two simple words to vibrate incessantly around the space of
this shadowy realm that he himself created.
Enin firmed himself against the icy shivers that always rode down his spine whenever
he entered this place. He could feel the intense emotions biting at his very flesh and this
cold tingle reminded him just how much he hated coming here. He spoke quickly in
response as if hoping to brush off any lasting echoes or at the very least to quickly
diminish the sentiment of the greeting.
“I am not your brother, Baannat.”
Enin’s tone held no such dueling emotional ambiguity. His words rang quite clearly of
caution and distrust.
Baannat, however, was not so easily swayed. Even more emotion spilled out of his
words that followed.
“Not brothers? Well, no. Perhaps not in the way lesser creatures see relations, but you
have to admit they are rather limited in their understanding of things. Sometimes you
have to go beyond the limits, expand your definition. Think of that, brother. We do that
all the time, you and I. We constantly expand what we can do, what we can sense, what
we understand. In this context, we are more closely related than these inferior things that
call themselves siblings. Just because they spilled out of the same mindless creature that
bore them, that’s enough for them to feel some kind of bond. You wish to ignore the
bond we have? You acknowledge it every time you come here. We certainly are brothers.
Look at the similarities. It goes far beyond our simple meetings here, it goes to the very
breadth of our abilities, abilities that no other can match. We both cast white magic, and
we both cast with two perfect circles…”
“That is where the similarities end.”
“Perhaps they do, but in that alone we are more alike than any so-called ‘relation’ of
these lesser beings with which you tend to waste so much time.”
In truth, Enin could not be exactly sure if there were any further similarities, for while
Baannat was eager to be heard, he remained less willing to be seen. He masked his visual
presence from Enin with shadow and distortion. Enin never got a good look at his
adversary, thus he could only guess as to what Baannat truly was. Despite this lack of
knowledge, Enin remained resolute in his belief that he had little in common with
Baannat, and they were certainly not brothers.
“We are not alike, we are very much opposite,” Enin stated.
Baannat almost allowed a cackle to slip across his tongue, but he held it back in order
to torment his guest further. “Opposites, you’ve talked about that with me before, haven’t
you? Opposing sides and such, it is almost necessary according to your concept of
existence. It is all for the sake of balance. Isn’t that what you always say? And balance is
so very important. It explains those things which you can’t explain. Perfection is
impossible to obtain because perfection is out of balance. These lesser creatures must
face hardships for the sake of balance.”
“That is only part of it,” Enin replied stoically.
“And what are the other parts again?”
“You know them as well as I do. Lessons need to be learned. Paths need to be
followed. When the time comes, decisions need to be made. These ‘lesser beings’ as you
refer to them to must be allowed to make certain choices…”
“But not everything is a choice,” Baannat quickly interrupted.
“Choices must be made without prejudice—with balance.”
“And is that why you won’t act against this serp that is currently making problems for
you and your friends? You’re afraid of tipping the balance?”
At the mention of the serp, Enin grew slightly more suspicious of Baannat. He had not
mentioned Sazar as of yet, but in truth, that meant little. Baannat certainly had ways to
see into the land, to know of events as they happened. It was not beyond reason to expect
that Baannat knew of the serp’s actions.
“I do not act for many reasons, it’s not my time, nor is it my place,” Enin declared
with a distinct tone of certainty. “I will not interfere in the workings of grander designs.”
“Ahh, when we don’t talk about balance we always come back to these thoughts of
destiny and fate. You think we all have some part to play in this grand scheme, it’s all
pretty much set in stone.”
“No, not set in stone, as I’ve said to you many times before. The event may be set, but
the choice is not. I’ve tried to explain it to you, but you just can’t grasp it. Is it because
you can’t see it?”
“I see everything that is important to see,” Baannat growled with more than a hint of
displeasure.
“Your weakness,” Enin noted. “You don’t like to admit that there are things beyond
your understanding.”
“There are many more beyond yours.” This time, there existed a great mix of emotion
in these words, and again, Baannat allowed the depth of these opposing feelings to
pulsate freely through the air of his realm.
Enin did his best to brush the vibrations from his being. “Those things I do not
understand, I do not wish to know. It does not benefit me to know why some twisted
individuals gain favor in taking advantage of others. I do not profit from insight of
actions spawned by selfish greed. And I certainly do not grow in spirit from
understanding why some beings, whether they be lesser or greater, would choose to bring
pain and torment to the innocent. You have clearly probed such things, and you
understand them far better than I. With that, there is one clear truth—this knowledge has
not strengthened you in any way shape or form.”
“One day you will discover that is not as clear a truth as you would like to believe,”
Baannat growled, holding only the emotion of hate.
“That day shall not come to pass.”
Baannat’s tone returned to its previous mix of emotions, the hate remaining but mixed
in with so many other trembling sentiments. “And yet again we return to the anchor of
you miscalculated beliefs, your ideas of fate. You think you won’t have to face me
because it falls to this delver. You keep on believing that.”
Thinking of the delver, Enin allowed his own passions to stir much more upbeat. “And
you go right on hoping you won’t have to face Ryson Acumen. He senses you.” With that
said, Enin seized on a new vibration he had not felt before. “You know that, don’t you?
You are aware the delver can feel your presence, even though you are in hiding, he can
actually sense you.”
Baannat did not reveal any concern. “He’s a delver, he senses lots of things, or maybe
I’m just playing with him, or playing with you for that matter. However, my patience is
not limitless as you well know. Why are you here?”
Enin made no attempt to mask his intentions. “I am here because of the serp you have
already mentioned. I am also here because of the delver. The moment that the serp
attacked an abandon town, Ryson Acumen sensed you. I came here to find out if you are
in any way connected to the serp’s most recent actions or if it is simple coincidence.”
“Is that a question?”
“I never intended on asking you directly, because I know I would not be able to trust
whatever answer you gave me.”
“Then a pointless trip here?”
“Baannat, your power nearly equals mine. You know what I can do, because you
know what you can do. Do you really think I need to speak to you to find out if you are
involved with this serp’s actions?”
“You always get me with your logic.”
“It’s not logic, it is truth. I came here simply to gauge the echoes of magic. If you
were involved, I would feel it, and thus, I would know it. I have been here long enough to
see that you do not have a hand in this as of yet. That, Baannat, is quite long enough for
me. Hopefully, I will not see you again any time soon.”
Before Enin could leave, however, Baannat spoke up to ensure he would be heard.
“You wish to leave before we have had our fun? That is not very nice of you. I’m
almost embarrassed to call you brother.”
“Must we go through this every time I come here?” Enin asked without masking his
tone of annoyance.
Baannat matched Enin’s tone with an expression of indignation. “You are the one
complaining? You come to my realm unannounced, come here of your own volition and
without invitation, and yet you always wish to protest when I ask this small thing of you.
It’s not like I asked you here and it’s not like I put any barriers to prevent you from
entering. You come when you like, you leave just as quickly. Is it so much to ask for you
to carry out this one little thing for me?”
“It is tiresome and wasteful,” Enin replied plainly. “We accomplish nothing, the result
is always the same and yet you insist on this silly game each time I come here.”
“Would you rather I spend my time designing ways to prevent you from coming here.
Or perhaps you would rather me focus on finding ways to drop in on you when you are in
your home? Hmmmm, that’s an idea. How would you like that, brother? How would you
like it if I just popped in on you without word or notice?”
“I would not like it, nor would I allow it to happen more than once.”
“A threat?” Baannat laughed.
“Call it what you like.”
Baannat became hostile at the indifference in Enin’s voice. “Very well, I will call it an
empty threat.”
“As I said, call it what you like.”
Long silence gripped the space between the two magic-casters. Finally, Baannat spoke
again, but this time with glee in his voice. “You have not left yet, so I take it you are
willing to have a bit of fun.”
“If you are intent on wasting your time, then I will not prevent you in seeing the
outcome we already know.”
“Excellent! What shall we work with today? Fire against ice?”
“We did that last time. If we are to do this, let us at least try to make it somewhat
interesting.”
The moment Enin finished his sentence, he could not see Baannat’s glare, but he could
most definitely feel it.
“Very well,” Baannat responded with a cold chill. “Let us try something new and a bit
different. We will both try to fill the space of my realm, as always, but this time I will
cast light and you will cast shadow. Let us see if you can cast darkness with the same
power as you cast the others.”
“Shadow is not necessarily darkness or a dark power as you imply,” Enin responded
confidently. “Shadow is the by product of light, plain and simple. There is nothing
inherently evil about it, only when it is corrupted by the magic-caster. Shadow is cooling
shade on a hot day, shadow is relief to tired eyes from a bright sun, shadow is the contrast
for even more vibrant colors. You see, Baannat, I can find the true power in all the facets
of the magic we possess. That is why I always win this game.”
Baannat giggled. “We shall see.”
In an instant, the shadowed figure opposing Enin swayed his hands and two rings of
white energy danced at his finger tips. They exploded in a blast of white hot light which
flowed outward as if radiating from pulsating star. The white light quickly changed to a
deep yellow as if the midday sun filled the room. The light began to swirl about as if it
took the shape of a pinwheel twirling in a gale wind.
Enin raised his hands and two circles of pure white power flowed about his wrists. He
threw his arms outward and the two circles flew from him in opposite directions. The
moment they struck the yellow twirling light bathing the very air, the white circles turned
gray and the darkness began to intertwine in the space between the ribbons of pale gold.
The pulsating light fought back against being invaded. It pushed to one side and then
another, but as it did Enin’s creation of shadow circled around and filled more areas
between the swirls. Back and forth the two forces pressed against each other, twisting and
twirling about this empty space like two intertwined tornados of completely opposite
rotations.
Eventually the give and take between the two forces ebbed, and the areas of yellow
light and dark gray became fixed. The weight of the two were very close to equal, but
even to an unassuming eye it was clear that there was slightly more shadow than light.
“It was an interesting show,” Enin offered almost apologetically, “but we always
come to the same conclusion, don’t we?”
“So far,” Baannat replied without bitterness in losing. If anything, the blurred figure
appeared to be smiling, but Enin could never be sure.
“If our game is over, I will be on my way.”
“It is over—for now.”
With that said, Enin simply walked out of this shapeless place and returned to his
study where he would await the entrance of another.

Joel Portsmith found little comfort in escaping the Rock Beetle. After deciding to
return to his home, the ever changing circumstances of the goblin attack continued to
affect his movements. He stayed near building walls and behind as much cover as
available, but never ventured fully inside a structure beyond a porch or an open stable
area. As long as he remained moving on the streets, he kept his ultimate destination in
mind. He feared the moment he entered a building that might seem to offer security, he
would lose this focus. Confusion ruled Pinesway, and screams of torment continued to
echo through the cluttered alleys. He knew there was no true safe place to hide, and he
had no intention of lulling himself into a false sense of security by muffling the
encroaching sounds of doom with four walls, a locked door, and a dark corner.
He encountered quite a few others in his path, many more people in fact than he ever
expected. With each block he crossed, he witnessed one or two fleeing in senseless,
panicked directions. Other remained hidden behind carts or under porches, and almost all
wore a glassy-eyed, dumbfounded expression. These thieves and hooligans were no
longer the predators of unsuspecting wanderers that ventured unwittingly into their hands.
Instead, creatures of a nightmare now hunted them, and their minds were ill-equipped to
deal with such irony. Many did not wish to speak to him, those that did often made little
sense. A mix of fear, anger, horror, and confusion slurred their words as well as their
meaning. When he was able to obtain viable information from a few of the less
bewildered, he cursed at the news.
“They’re herding us here like cattle,” he grumbled to himself. “They’ve got us
surrounded and now they’re heading inward. No wonder everyone is running in every
direction. Running east is as bad as heading west, same thing in every direction, bad
news. I don’t think there’s anyway out of here. Ok, doesn’t matter. I’m not looking to
leave. I just have to get home, have to keep moving as long as possible in that direction. I
wonder how far I can get.”
He avoided contemplating this question again for as long as he could. Eventually,
however, he was forced to a stop. His careful movements brought him a fair distance
away from the town’s center square and about six blocks from his home. Unfortunately,
at this point he encountered a segment of the goblins’ forward line. To make matters
worse, this particular group of monsters showed no sign of advancing. They stood in a
loose formation with clear lines of sight in several directions. They cut off every path he
could see that offered a way to his planned destination.
Joel crouched low and avoided attention, but it was not something he could do
forever. “I could double back, but that’s not going to get me where I want to go. Ok, not
the situation I had in mind, but this ain’t a festival parade, either. Face facts, it was going
to come down to a fight eventually. Might as well start it here, just don’t want to end it
here.”
Joel took a long look down the street towards a group of goblins that staked out a
crossroad in front of him. They crouched low and their small stature made them difficult
targets, but they seemed to show no care toward finding cover. For the most part they
stood out in the open, as if they held no fear of attack, or perhaps it was just their way of
being seen so that any panicked human wouldn’t dare try to pass them.
Joel remained hidden from their sight as he contemplated the situation. “I got a clear
shot at a few of them right now. If I fire from here, though, there going to see me.” He
paused to look back over his shoulder. “And no real good escape from here, either. Once
I take my shots, I’m gonna have to move, but I gotta move smart. Not going to get
trapped here.”
Joel remained careful to stay out of sight and always remained mindful of the sounds
of the hook hawk that remained in the distance. The thought of the rock beetle gave him a
cold shudder, but there wasn’t much he could do about that nightmare. If it was under his
feet right now, he’d never know it.
Instead, he focused on his main objective and toward that end he needed two things—
a covered spot to take out a few goblins with his crossbow, and then a safe path of retreat.
That path had to allow him a route away from the goblins not to a dead end. He wanted
his withdrawal to take him a safe distance away, but also allow him to turn back in a
direction toward his home.
Scanning the row of buildings, he found a secure spot to shoot fairly quickly. An
emptied and ransacked merchant store had two broken windows facing the goblin line. It
also fronted an equally empty warehouse that included a broken delivery door that
opened to a back alley. Calculating the distance from the storefront to the goblin position,
he believed he could hit his targets. The cover of the store would allow him to take at
least two or three clean shots from the windows, maybe even four. With the windows
already broken he wouldn’t make much noise. Still standing in one spot, the goblins
didn’t look too concerned with facing an attack at this particular moment, so he believed
he could catch them off guard. Once he fired, he hoped that before they could get a clear
lock on his position he could move back through the storefront, into the warehouse, and
then out into the alley.
The alley ran parallel to a street he needed to cross to get back home, so he could
follow this path for as long as necessary. If the goblins called for reinforcements, they
would have to close in tight, and that would open some holes in their line. He just needed
to create enough havoc to distract the goblins enough for him to get through.
He took his position in the store and stared down through his line of fire. He wouldn’t
get a better chance then this. “It’s getting darker,” he whispered to himself. “Shadows are
getting longer, must be near sunset. Don’t want to do this in the dark, that’s their
advantage, not mine. Ok, best do it now and get it over with.”
He carefully slid the crossbow down from over his shoulder and took hold of the
stock. His hand trembled slightly at first, but with a quick breath, he steadied himself. He
loaded the first bolt, and decided not to take any more time to think. His decision was
made and it was time to fire.
The first bolt found its mark in the neck of an unsuspecting goblin. The creature spun
around twice upon being hit before crumpling to the ground. The other goblins jumped at
first and Joel thought they might scatter. Something, however, seemed to grip them in
place as they stood frozen in dumbfounded awe of the sight. They looked back and forth
from the downed monster to the streets as if trying to determine from where the attack
came. The spiraled movement of the victim’s fall, however, left them looking in the
wrong direction.
Joel allowed himself a short nod to his luck as he loaded another bolt. He took aim,
but this time his fortune did not smile with the same benevolence. The bolt flew straight
and true, but it smashed against the thick metal chest guard of another unmoving goblin.
The creature was stunned as it was knocked off its feet, but the bolt did not penetrate the
armor and the goblin was unhurt. It appeared to peer right at the window from where the
bolt came.
Joel ducked low, mumbled a curse as he loaded a third bolt and moved over to the
second window. When he raised his head slightly to get a look at the situation, the curses
faded.
The goblins remained unmoving and in the open, almost as if standing in a dazed
stupor. They looked in all directions and none made a move toward his position. He
decided to gamble at this point. He fired the crossbow once more and quickly reloaded,
fired again, reloaded and fired a third time. He ducked down and moved back to the first
window, popped his head up, and took another long look while he loaded yet another
bolt. He could see that luck swung back to his favor. All three bolts found a victim and
now there were four goblins on the ground already dead, or mortally wounded. The
remaining goblins lost their stoic nature and now moved in pure panic. They hissed and
growled as they dove for cover or ran in every direction. They appeared to care very little
for determining the source of fire, and thus Joel did not make an immediate attempt to
leave the store.

Sazar immediately sensed the attack on his goblins. He felt the loss of the minion
almost as if someone plucked a scale from his skin. As he stood in a dusty warehouse, he
peered out a half broken window toward the north.
“What’s this?” he asked himself. He flipped through a myriad of images in his mind.
He saw Pinesway from varying perspectives through the flashes of sensations he obtained
from his goblins. He quickly categorized the different sections of town and immediately
sharpened his focus on the area of the attack. He could visualize the goblin dead on the
ground with a crossbow bolt in its neck.
“Crossbow fire, but just one shot,” the serp mused. “I wonder where from. There will
be another I’m sure.” Sazar linked his thoughts directly to the goblins in this precise area.
The images of the other sections of town quickly blurred out of his mind. With his
attention narrowly focused on goblins near the point of the assault, his contact with the
other monsters in town broke off. For these minions, the orders Sazar previously pressed
into their minds would remain in the forefront of their thoughts, but they were also now
more or less on their own.
“Stay as you are,” the serp whispered to a thread of energy that instantaneously
brought the command to the goblins that stood near Joel’s position. They did not hear it
with their ears, but it rang in their thoughts as if the order had been shouted from a
mountain top. “Keep your eyes to the buildings toward the center of town. Look for
movement.”
At that moment, the serp actually felt the bolt that Joel had fired into the chest armor
of the second goblin. So powerful was the link to this creature that Sazar almost lost his
breath. He followed the gaze of this fallen but unhurt goblin, and Sazar believed he knew
where the attacker hid. He focused more strenuously on the sight that came crisper into
his mind. Seizing the very vision of the goblin at the scene, the serp saw movement of
shadows through a broken window.
“Yes, there he is. This one is getting brave. Can’t let that happen.” He refocused his
thoughts on the band of goblins. “Split into two groups and sur…”
His complete order never reached the goblins. Another bolt found a goblins ear and
the creature screamed. The sudden explosion of pain and sound surprised the serp for
only a moment, but it was a moment long enough. Another bolt found its mark and a
goblin collapsed, dead instantly with a bolt lodged past the arm hole of its chest guard
and into the creature’s black heart. A third and final bolt also hit its target, piercing a
goblins cheek and through its mouth. This goblin could not scream, but it gurgled in
agony.
The serp endeavored to refocus his link with the goblins that were under attack, but
the creatures’ own delirious panic overrode such an attempt. They broke formation under
the stress, ignored any whisper of the serp’s commands that tried to enter their thoughts,
their minds clouded with their own fear. Sazar’s words could reach their minds, but it
could not break through the haze of terror that now gripped their every concern. They ran
and hissed, scrambled and screeched. They showed little regard for anything else other
than searching for cover from the unseen attack. They moved without direction other than
the desire to avoid the next bolt.
“Incompetent imbeciles,” Sazar growled. He quickly ended his link with these
goblins, deciding further attempts to corral them would be futile. Images from his other
minions slowly began to filter back into his mind once more. He sensed no other calamity
throughout the town and he drank in the relief that this instance of resistance appeared to
be completely isolated. Still, he needed to address the issue to ensure that it would not
spread. He immediately redirected the hook hawk to cover the area from above.
He considered sending the rock beetle as well, but quickly dismissed the thought. The
beetle remained in its position chomping away on the remains of the two goblins the serp
had commanded to be its meal. More importantly, the beetle remained stationed in a
strategic position that cut off the river rogue from the rest of the town. With his ring of
goblins tightening on the center of Pinesway, the serp wished to keep the territorial river
rogue from venturing beyond its claimed land. The rogue could no doubt smell the rock
beetle and would remain defensive of its position as opposed to curious about the
upheaval near the town’s center.
“Can’t rely on the goblins, though,” Sazar lamented to himself. “My other shag is too
far across town. Best to send the big one.”
With that, Sazar directed a mental command to the large shag that served as the serp’s
personnel body guard and was doing nothing more at the moment then standing guard
outside the building. The shag grunted, crouched low, and bounded off toward the center
of chaos that was all that was now left of Pinesway.

Ryson circled Pinesway from the edges of the surrounding forest before he even
considered entering the town. He dashed through the trees in a blur of movement, quickly
taking glimpses of each road that became visible as he traveled. The river that cut across
the northwest section of town proved to be his only true obstacle. He could have cut
across the shallow water with ease, but he did not wish to deal with the hazards of
soaking his feet and lower legs with the bitter cold water. Just because the flowing river
kept ice from forming didn’t mean it wasn’t dangerously cold. He also decided to avoid
the bridge crossing when he spotted a river rogue crouched low beneath the span.
The creature seemed satisfied to remain still and let the events unfold in the town
without its participation. It seemed content to guard its own small territory, so Ryson
decided to leave it alone.
Instead, the delver scurried up a large willow tree, scampered over leafless branches
and through vines that hung down and across the flowing river, then leapt across to the
thick branches of a wild cherry tree. Once he darted down the trunk of this tree, he was
across the river and continued his initial scout.
The delver cared little for what he saw. The goblins he visually pinpointed numbered
at least a hundred. Since he could see only the outskirts of the town and not far into the
center, he believed the true number to stand at a much higher total, perhaps three or four
times as many. The creatures surrounded the town’s outer boundaries, strategically
covering each significant entranceway. The movements and sounds he could detect from
deeper into the collection of structures indicated the devious monsters were closing in on
the town square from all directions. Anyone trapped inside appeared to have little chance
for escape just as he found little hope for a way to enter undetected. He knew he could
bolt at top speed past the stationed guards at just about any point without risking injury,
but his movement would be detected. At this point, he still did not have a precise plan,
and thus, he wished to avoid being spotted.
Very early in his scout, he noticed the presence of a mammoth shag guarding a large
warehouse near the southern entrance. Ryson recognized this monster. Sazar used this
creature as a personal body guard, thus the delver remained certain Sazar was in that
building and more likely than not directing the goblins movements.
Ryson now felt certain that Sazar was up to more than a simple raid for supplies or a
blood hunt for his goblins to release their dark desires. Everything he saw pointed to the
goblins securing the town. The problem remained that he could not truly know why.
Sazar was not allowing anyone to escape, thus he could be targeting an individual or a
group. Pinesway was now a haven for thieves and bandits, perhaps they stole something
he coveted. Ryson also considered that the serp may have simply wanted to pick the town
clean and his tactics kept any humans from escaping with possible treasure. The truth of
the matter was that Ryson simply could not be certain of the serp’s intentions without
further information.
The delver quickly took a path south through the trees further into the forest. Once
past the southern edge of town, he circled back up and came to face the main entrance
where he first spied the large shag standing guard outside the warehouse. Remaining
hidden, he closed his eyes and focused his attention on what he could hear. Guttural
shouts of goblins mixed in with an intermittent human scream and a shriek from a hook
hawk off to the northeast. He tried to put a picture to the sounds and could only imagine
the uncompromising forward movement of the goblins against a terrified group of
humans.
Suddenly, he picked up sounds that were quite out of place. Grumbling growls of
goblins were replaced by new screams of pain, screams from a goblin, not a human.
Moments later, more goblin squeals of tumultuous confusion. Ryson tried to pinpoint the
area but could only guess it was occurring slightly to the west of the center of town.
Wherever it was, goblins were now in a fit of disorder. Adding to his curiosity over this
turn of events, the shag guarding the outside of the warehouse stirred from its statue like
stance and hurried off toward the direction of the commotion.
“Interesting,” Ryson stated the obvious to himself. “He’s going somewhere in a hurry.
If Sazar is in that building, he just lost his guard.”
The delver considered that point only for an instant. There were two goblins circling
the building, but they were frivolous in terms of protecting the serp. Ryson could enter
the warehouse and be out of their sight before the goblins even knew he was in town. A
clear path to the serp offered itself right before him, yet his eyes focused on another path,
that of the shag.
“He’s going in the direction of the commotion. I’d bet on it. That means the goblins
are having some trouble, or someone is giving them more than they can handle. The shag
is going to clean up the mess. That’s the only answer that makes sense.”
In the end, the delver’s curiosity regarding the shag’s destination proved more enticing
than the open path to the now unprotected Sazar. In truth, thoughts of the serp faded from
his focus, washed out by the questions regarding this new turn of events. His delver
instincts called for him to answer these questions.
As if to punctuate this desire, the movement of the hook hawk also caught his
attention. Where it had been circling the eastern section of town, it was now curving its
path to the west. It let out a spine shivering shriek when it passed the center of town, and
its swooping, semi-circular flight path led it in the same direction as the shag was
charging toward.
Thoughts of Sazar now disappeared completely from Ryson’s mind. He eyed the path
of the shag and quickly noted how the goblins guarding the streets cast a wary glance
upon the loping monster. Their natural fear of the shag overrode the serp’s order to keep
a watchful eye on the entrance ways to the town. For a brief moment, their attention
focused firmly upon the shag, and that was all the distraction the delver needed.
In a blur of motion, Ryson dashed across the open land that stood between the tree line
of Dark Spruce Forest and the first structures of Pinesway. He darted behind one building
and then around another before the goblins that guarded this area lost sight of the
lumbering shag. They never saw the delver, and thus Sazar never gained an image of
Ryson’s entrance into Pinesway.

With the goblins in disarray, Joel watched with less worry over being spotted in the
merchant shop. He peered through the broken window and watched as the goblins
scattered in different directions. He raised the crossbow several more times and fired
bolts into their midst. He never hit his mark now that they moved in haphazard fashion.
He tried to lead a target, but the goblins turned and twisted with each racing step they
took. He never guessed correctly which way his target would turn and thus all his bolts
ended up lodging into the walls of surrounding structures or the sides of emptied carts.
Still, the continued crossbow fire added to the commotion. He noted that several more
goblins began to appear in his view both further off to the north and south of his current
position.
“Ok, they’re starting to take notice and they’re moving in from other directions to see
what’s going on. If I’m going to find an opening, it should be soon.”
He crouched low as he tossed the crossbow back over his shoulder and made a path to
the back of the store. He kicked away a loose panel that blocked his way to the rear
warehouse and pushed through the litter of this larger open space. Before he leapt out into
the alley, he leaned out slightly to take a quick look up and down the path. He saw
nothing other than the debris of broken barrels and crates. Just as he took his first step out
into the open, he heard the shriek of the hook hawk.
“Not good!” Joel shook his head. The alley was narrow, but most of the buildings in
this area were only one story high and offered little cover overhead. “Can’t change it
now, and can’t get caught here.”
Joel took off in a slow trot to the south, clinging to walls as best he could while still
keeping a respectable pace. He needed to create some distance between himself and the
point where the goblins were now congregating. He believed if he could get at least three
blocks down, he might have a chance to turn out of the alley and make a break toward his
home.
Another shriek of the hook hawk turned his skin cold. He braved a look up and back
over his shoulder. He caught the spiraling shadow of a large winged creature. The sun
was low in the southwestern sky, and with the shadow behind him, he calculated the
beast to be flying very low and almost directly over his head. He stopped dead in his
tracks. He believed he could actually hear the wind ruffling through twisted feathers very
nearby, much too close to give him anything other then a sense of his own mortality. He
flattened himself against the wall, offering as little a target to the sky as possible. A
breeze struck his face and he tensed, expecting to feel the cold hard talons pierce his
shoulders, but the pain never came.
The hook hawk shrieked a third time. This time the sound came further off to his right.
He heard the terrified squeal of a goblin in the same area. Joel moved away from the side
of the building and toward the center of the alley to risk taking a better look. Into the
sights of the sun, he saw the darkened outline of the hawk swooping further up into the
sky. He then saw the shadow pass along the ground in front of him and made out the
outline of a small figure clasped in the talons of the bird.
“Bad luck for that goblin, good luck for me. That had to scatter the others over there.
If I have a chance, it’s now. OK, just have to make it over there as fast as I can.”
Joel decided to bet the commotion of the hook hawk and his previous crossbow fire
might have distracted and confused the goblins enough to offer him his best chance at a
break through their lines. With the hook hawk now more interested in a meal than
watching the ground, he believed there was no better time for a quick sprint out of the
alley and toward his home. As he bounded out into an open street, the sight of the
monstrous shag running right toward him dissolved any confidence he had gained.

Ryson found it almost painfully simple to follow the shag without being noticed. The
shag ran with a single minded purpose, always looking forward, moving at a steady pace.
It never stopped to sniff the wind or to check its flank. It only ran onward in a northern
direction. The monster took to the main roads and traveled with a confidence as if it had
journeyed on these streets before. In reality, it simply followed the instructions the serp
had placed in its mind, and thus, it gave no care to its surroundings or worries at
becoming lost.
As for the goblins that Ryson ventured near, their attention would always fall to the
giant shag. Despite knowing that this horrible giant was an ally as opposed to a threat
looking to make a meal of them, they could not dampen their own instincts. It was simply
impossible for them to remain calm when it bounded past them. The sight of the creature
demanded their attention as well as their caution whenever it was near. Every ounce of
their being commanded they remain watchful of this natural predator.
The delver used this distraction to his own advantage and dashed by any sentry points
with relative ease. As long as he remained a certain distance behind the shag, he could
count on extended moments of goblin diversion. Block after block, he moved in a
repetitive sequence. He would case the goblin positions, wait for the shag to catch their
attention, dart across any open area, take cover behind a new set of structures, and then
begin the process over again. Within moments, he closed upon the inner sections of
Pinesway and quickly became disgusted with what he witnessed.
The goblins had not raided this town for supplies, at least not yet. It was clear that at
this point they had focused solely on eradicating all the human inhabitants that remained
of Pinesway. The delver crossed several victims dead in the streets, some obviously
pulled from houses, others shot down while trying to escape. He saw no signs of mercy,
just the opposite. The goblins’ trail of devastation showed a clear indication of their
savage strategy. They entered buildings quickly, breaking through doors and windows.
Their progress through town made it clear they spent no time searching for valuables.
They simply forced all inhabitants out into the streets, either to be killed on sight or to be
driven further into the center of town. Knowing from his initial scout that the goblins
completely surrounded Pinesway, he imagined this scene of brutality existed in a full
circle around the town.
Still, his attention remained on following the shag that continued its unrelenting trek
through the streets. Beyond avoiding their attention, Ryson dismissed the growing
numbers of goblins he encountered. He also almost ignored the swirling flight of the
hook hawk, but the appearance of this creature changed the dynamic of the situation. It
shrieked several times and the goblins were now less concerned with the shag and more
troubled by this flying beast. And for good reason as one goblin fell victim to the
gripping talons that carried it back up into the dying light of the dusk sky.
The delver watched this riveting scene for only a moment as his own instincts rang a
loud warning. Ahead of him, the shag suddenly veered from its forward path and turned
to the right. By its movements, Ryson believed the shag was now near its destination.
When the monster crouched low and its step altered from a traveling pace to a hunting
stalk, the delver knew the situation had altered dramatically. As if to confirm his
instincts, an elderly man looking somewhat winded and carrying a crossbow over his
back stumbled out directly in the monster’s path.
The shag would have snatched the old man from where he stood in three heartbeats if
Ryson had not acted. The delver now completely ignored the surrounding goblins. He
bounded out behind his cover and dashed toward the shag in a blur of motion. His hands
came over the top of his shoulder to grab the hilt of the Sword of Decree that was
sheathed on his back. With a sweeping motion, he pulled the blade free at the same time
that he cut across the path of the monster. In one continuous movement, he slashed the
blade upward toward the shags shoulder as he twisted himself in a midair leap. The tip of
the blade struck the matted fur of the giant, and as it cut through the monster’s coat and
sliced into skin, the shag screeched in pain as if the small cut had past through its very
core.
Ryson landed on his feet directly between the shag and the old man. He held tight to
the sword with both hands as he peered into the eyes of his adversary. The blade of the
sword glowed with the brilliance of the mid-day sun, but this was not the only
enchantment the sword released in this instant. As Ryson’s gaze locked onto the shag, he
felt the link to the serp, and as was its power, the magical sword decreed Sazar’s desires
as clearly as if the delver could read it on parchment.
Ryson saw what Pinesway would become under the serp’s control—a breeding ground
for goblins, a growing threat to every human outpost, town, and city for leagues in all
directions. As the picture of this town in the future became clearer in his mind, he could
not fathom the number of monsters it would hold. Like an overpopulated anthill, the
buildings of Pinesway would burst near the seams with thousands upon thousands of dark
creatures. In this vision, he understood the true power of the goblin horde, a number so
large they could simply inundate any target they chose. And this nest of monsters would
grow as it overtook each human town. Ryson wondered if anything could stop such a
force, and he knew even Burbon might eventually fall.
With such horror, however, there was also hope. Through the sword’s power of
declaration, Ryson now also knew what needed to be done to stop this nightmare before it
became a reality. He also knew he held in his hands the power to accomplish this task.

“The cursed delver from Burbon!” Sazar hissed. “What is he doing here?”
The serp took a moment to concentrate on all the images which passed through his
mind. He could visualize the entire town at this moment. His hook hawk stationed itself
on a tall grain tower near the center of town, and although it was busy shredding a goblin
into an easier meal to swallow, it continued to cast a wary eye in nearly every direction.
This panoramic along with the viewpoints of hundred of goblins that still encircled
Pinesway gave Sazar a complete picture of the situation. He then focused in on the rock
beetle, which was just finishing its own goblin meal. The giant insect stood above
ground, but all six legs remained anchored into the dirt street. Sazar could feel the
vibrations that the beetle sensed and this allowed his awareness to flow for a great
distance outward.
Other than the appearance of the delver, every other facet of the raid seemed in perfect
order. No other grouping of goblins reported any resistance from the still frightened and
fleeing inhabitants of Pinesway. His minions continued to make steady progress in
forcing out hiding humans and channeling them to the town center. The borders of the
town right to the trees of Dark Spruce that surrounded it remained clear. Through the
sensory perception of the beetle, he sensed no coordinated movement other than that of
his own forces. In every aspect, he remained in complete control of the battle.
The appearance of Ryson Acumen, however, left him with more than an uneasy
feeling. He hated this delver, for he knew what he was capable of.
“Why is he here?” Sazar cursed under his breath. “Burbon is his home now. Pinesway
holds nothing for him. He is alone to face a goblin raid in an abandoned town. This
makes no sense.”
A realization struck the serp like a clap of thunder. “But is he alone? He is close with
the wizard, and the wizard is far too powerful. He could easily disguise himself from me,
or even an entire force of the human guard. They could be surrounding us now. As for the
wizard, he could be anywhere. He flies as easily as the hook hawk. He could be above the
town at any point. He could be above me right now.”
The serp’s words died off with this assumption. At that instant, Sazar understood what
is was like to be Joel Portsmith wondering if a rock beetle was directly underfoot, except
the serp now worried if an angry wizard was floating over his head. Sazar looked about in
a near panic. He also realized that other than the two goblins that patrolled the exterior of
the building he stood within, he was completely alone—unguarded and vulnerable. He
sent an immediate command to the monstrous shag that stood before Ryson Acumen.
Return to me at once!

Ryson stood unyielding between the immense shag in front of him and the old man
behind him. His eyes sharpened with a new found confidence. He now knew exactly what
Sazar hoped to accomplish, but he also knew exactly what to do to stop the serp. The
sword had given him the gift of insight as it had done in the past. There was no longer
any question over what he could truly accomplish, how many innocents he could still
save, or how he might be able to upset the serp’s plans. His mind held a simple truth of
how to stop Sazar from gaining control of Pinesway—now or in the future. He grasped
the power to do so in his hands and his body held the capacity in the abilities of being a
purebred delver.
Ryson called back to the old man behind him. “Back away quickly.”
Joel Portsmith didn’t need a second request. He gladly complied immediately and
began back pedaling to the alley from which he came.
Ryson readied himself for the charge of the shag, believing the monster would move
once the old man began to retreat. Movement from the shag, however, was slow in
coming. It appeared almost distracted, its eyes nearly vacant. Eventually, it did move, but
not in the direction Ryson expected. The beast turned quickly and retraced its previous
path in the opposite direction.
Ryson held firm until certain the shag was indeed in full retreat. He then turned
quickly to the old man. “Get back in the alley. Stay under cover.”
The delver scanned the area quickly registering goblin positions and their apparent
readiness to move forward. To his delight, this particular area remained empty of any
immediate threats, but even in the fading daylight he could make out dozens of the dark
creatures assembling together to the north and south. He darted into the alley to join the
old man.
Ryson sized Joel up quickly and for the most part liked what he saw. While the strain
of this day’s events obviously took their toll, the man appeared unhurt and in control of
his senses. Considering the magnitude of these events, that in itself was a huge credit to
the man’s inner strength. He was armed with a crossbow, but Ryson now knew the
weapon was no longer necessary.
“My name is Ryson Acumen. I’m a delver from Burbon.”
“Figured you to be a delver,” the old man said with a very small hint of animosity.
Ryson ignored the tone. “You alone?”
“I’m traveling alone, if that’s what you mean.”
“But you’ve come across others.”
“’Course I have.”
“Mostly in the center of town?”
“Yep.”
“And where were you headed?”
Joel pointed over Ryson’s shoulder back to the goblin line. “That way, was heading
home.”
“That will have to wait.” Ryson stated firmly.
Joel’s eyes narrowed and Ryson knew the man didn’t like taking orders, so the delver
spelled the situation out for him.
“You’ll get home, alive and in one piece, if you wait. If you go now, the goblins will
cut you down. There’s a serp that’s directing all of this. He’s going to reinforce the line
where the shag retreated. That’s the direction you need to go.”
Joel grunted in annoyance.
Ryson didn’t wait for him to complain. “You can still get there, you just have to have
a bit of patience. I also want you to do something for me. I don’t think you’ll argue too
much seeing I just saved your life.” Here, Ryson played on a hunch, a hunch that honor
meant something to this man.
Joel nodded unhappily, but nodded just the same. “What do you need?”
“I want you to return to the people you passed,” Ryson stated simply. “Don’t take any
risks, don’t endanger yourself. Just go back to the center of town, it’s safer there anyway.
Tell everyone you meet to find cover and stay put. I’m going to take care of the goblin
problem.”
Joel appeared only mildly surprised, but questioned the delver anyway.
“Just you?”
“Just me.”
“How?”
“Fear.”
Joel eyed the delver and the shining sword that he grasped. He could not find it in
himself to argue.
“Ok, I’ll go back and tell everyone help is on the way and to stay out of sight. Getting
dark now anyway, probably too dangerous to do anything else. You’ll let us know when
you’re done doing whatever it is you’re going to do?”
“I’ll meet you at the town square.”
Joel looked to the ground, spit off to the side, took a heavy breath, and simply turned
around. He moved down the alley at a cautious steady pace, acknowledging this turn of
events with sullen acceptance.
Ryson believed the man would not go back on his word, and thus quickly turned his
attention to the goblins. The Sword of Decree shone brighter now as the light of dusk
faded away into twilight. He held a beacon to the goblins that stood off in the distance, a
target, but it would not matter. He would move at a speed that was beyond their
comprehension.
He quickly eyed the growing number of dark creatures in the distance. Ryson
reviewed in his mind what he now knew to be the serp’s forces. “Only goblins in this area
to deal with, but there’s a hook hawk, a rock beetle, and at least two shags to worry about
as well. Shags shouldn’t be too much of a problem, the big one is probably back with
Sazar. The hawk just ate and is more a reconnaissance tool than anything else. The beetle
could be a danger, just have to keep an eye on the ground so I don’t trip. Sazar did me a
favor keeping the goblins in this formation. All I have to do is circle the city in expanding
rings working outward. Eventually, I’ll clear them all out.”
Ryson targeted the closest group of goblins which stood one block to the northeast. He
would hit them first. Ryson now better understood Sazar’s power over these creatures. He
knew the serp kept them confused and fearful. The serp did not cast spells to influence
his minions, but the magical energies that flowed through the air allowed him to press his
will upon them. Once Sazar took hold of their minds, he used the magic and their own
emotions to keep their individual will in check.
The delver had enough contact with goblins to understand their minds as well.
Individually, they were weak and vulnerable, but as a horde they represented a threat to
even the largest beasts. The serp used this natural tendency to belong to a horde along
with the goblins weak will to maintain control over a large number. That control,
however, would last only as long as the goblins individual instinct for survival did not
interfere with the serp’s commands. It was this weakness that Ryson intended to exploit.
The serp used fear to keep the goblins in check, but a creature of this character could
learn to fear many things. If a new fear became larger than the goblin’s fear of the serp,
then all bets were off.
Ryson switched his grip of the Sword of Decree to one hand and held the point out in
front of him. The natural starlight around him magnified a hundred fold and he knew he
was now visible for great distances. It would draw crossbow fire almost immediately, so
he moved with greater swiftness.
Like a meteor streaking through the night sky, a ball of light advanced on the goblins.
They stood dumbfounded at the scene, totally unable to comprehend who or even what
was headed straight for them. A few found the courage to lift a crossbow to fire, but none
accomplished firing off a single shot.
The Sword of Decree spun like flaming pinwheel in Ryson’s hand. He darted from
one goblin to the next in a blur of motion. He stabbed with his sword, but not at vital
organs and not with deep thrusts. He forced the blade forward just enough to cut through
the swollen rubbery goblin skin at a shoulder, an arm, or an upper leg. When the point of
the sword made contact, it burned. Such was the power of the Sword of Decree. It was
forged with magic to fight off the shadow trees, and within its blade it had the power to
burn souls, even the damned souls of twisted creatures such as goblins.
When these goblins felt the burning pain that went deep beyond the wound, they
gained a new fear, a great fear. Their thoughts of Sazar dissipated like droplets of water
thrown on a blazing inferno. They howled and cowered, most dropping to the ground in
twisted, painful terror. So great was their fear, they could not find the strength to run.
Ryson decided to give them the incentive to do so.
When Ryson wounded all he saw, he yelled out like a raving mad man. “This town
holds your ruin just as I now hold your souls in this sword. I can make them burn! Leave
this place and never return. Leave now and tell all others of your kind what you have felt
here in Pinesway! This town is cursed and all that enter will die painfully!”
The goblins of this pack needed no further encouragement.

“He is removing them from my control! The sword is enchanted. It’s burning fear into
anything it touches, so much fear that I can’t overcome it. He is also moving so fast that
before long he will have sent every goblin I command scrambling into the woods.”
Suddenly, the serp gained yet another perspective that served to increase his disdain
for the situation. The rock beetle sensed a new commotion, but this disturbance did not
come from the town, it came from the trees, from the areas where his minions now
retreated.
Sazar seized upon the last fragments of trace images he could obtain from these
goblins that surfaced through their panic. He viewed their last visions with increasing
alarm. Several fell into an ambush, slaughtered quickly and efficiently.
“Human soldiers waiting in the woods to attack! They are efficient in weapons.
Burbon guards!”
Sazar pounded the walls in growing frustration as he now knew that a contingent of
Sy’s men had reached a position at Pinesway’s edge. They simply waited patiently for the
fleeing goblins to fall into their range. It took little effort for them to dispatch all that
came into their path.
“That means the delver did not come alone,” Sazar bellowed. The rage of frustration,
however, soon turned to distress. “These are soldiers of Burbon. If they have come, then
perhaps the wizard…”
Concern over the possible appearance of Enin to his midst caused the serp to break off
in mid-sentence. He blurted out his own realization, and the importance that it must not
come to pass.
“I will not be trapped here.”
He sent out an order to his most prized minions. He ordered the rock beetle to burrow
underground and tunnel into the forest, and he commanded the hook hawk to
immediately take flight high into the night sky. The one shag still engaged in the battle he
ordered to escort as many goblins as possible to exit the town through the eastern gate.
The large shag was already on its way back to Sazar’s side, thus the serp simply
encouraged the monster to move faster. To most of the goblins that still remained under
his control, he stopped pressing them forward and instead hastened them to make for the
trees in the quickest way possible. He hoped the scattering of the goblins throughout the
forest in different directions would make it more difficult for Sy’s guard to eliminate
large numbers of them. Sazar sent a final command to twenty goblins that had not yet
been fallen upon by the delver. They remained to the southeastern outskirts of town.
“Move quickly to the square at the town center. You will find groups of humans
banded together. Open fire upon them. If you see one moving at great speed holding a
shining object, avoid it at all costs. Keep your distance, but continue to fire with your
crossbows at any humans you see. Continue this until I call for you.”
Sazar, in fact, had no intention of calling for these goblins. He was sacrificing them
so he could make his own escape.

Ryson’s pace quickened, hastened by the fact that the goblins were now in full retreat.
He chased them down and continued to stab at them with his sword. He warned each
goblin he wounded to flee Pinesway and never return.
At this point, the goblins needed little incentive to run off. No longer did they feel the
pressing demands of the serp to take the town and kill its inhabitants. Instead, they sensed
the new turmoil in the air brought about by the delver’s counterattack. They noted the
retreat of the shags and the hook hawk. Some were even aware of the rock beetle’s quick
disappearance into the ground. Most of the goblins were fleeing in retreat even before
Ryson could reach their position.
In a spiraling pattern that continuously circled outward, Ryson became a blur of light
that flashed down streets and alleys. From the distance, he appeared like a flaming arrow
streaking through the air. He scorched well over two hundred goblins with his sword
before he reached Pinesway’s outer limits. When his path led him around the southern
portion of the town, he bounded into the warehouse which he believed the serp used as a
hideout. As he expected, the building was now empty, Sazar gone.
Ryson quickly traced markings on the ground and walls and followed them about the
open space and back to the door.
“He was here alright,” Ryson confirmed to himself as he stepped back out into the
night air and inspected more tracks on the ground. “He took off when the big shag
returned to him.”
Realizing tracking the serp further into the forest at this point would gain nothing,
Ryson dashed off in a direct path toward the town square. With the sword still in his
hands, he lit up the areas he moved through like the welcome sight of the sun after a
terrible storm. When he reached the town center, he counted many people still hiding
under stairs, beneath broken carts, and within darkened, empty buildings. He found Joel
sitting on a bench, slightly hunched over, looking very tired and angry.
“You alright?” Ryson asked.
Joel looked up at the delver with an expression of sheer disgust. “Not hurt, but real
annoyed. Why does a serp attack an abandoned town?”
“He wanted to take what the thieves here already stole and he wanted a base.” Ryson
responded confidently. “He wanted the whole town. He was going to use whatever he
could take here to buy more supplies, more weapons, and more food. Then, he was going
to make it a haven for goblins he could control.”
Joel spat at the ground “Ok, and he was going to kill us all because I guess he didn’t
want any humans as neighbors.”
“Would you want to live next door to a goblin?” Ryson offered, almost a little too
lighthearted for Joel’s liking.
“No, I like living next to abandoned houses. No neighbor is the best neighbor.”
“Be that as it may…”
A familiar voice called out from the shadows that interrupted the delver in midsentence. “Ryson Acumen! There are goblins to your left about to fire upon you!”
Ryson immediately recognized the voice, but took no time to acknowledge it. He
directed his attention to the few people that were slowly moving out into the open.
“Everyone get down!” he shouted.
Most everyone dropped to the ground or dove back to their original hiding places,
though some remained too stunned over the events of the day to have much
comprehension of what was going on around them. A few stood unsteadily on their feet.
Whirling to his left, Ryson began to spin the Sword of Decree again in hand like a
pinwheel. The shimmering, spinning blade had a dazzling affect on everyone that
witnessed it. With the sword still twirling, he turned toward his left and the group of
goblins that had been ordered to advance on the town square. He leapt in the air and
quickly knocked several goblin arrows out of midair. When the first barrage of goblin fire
ended, six long arrows sliced through the air in succession, but these arrows came from
the opposite direction and all found their mark in a targeted goblin. Ryson leapt across
the remaining distance between himself and the surviving dozen or so goblins. He
quickly disarmed several of them, knocking the crossbows out of their hands before they
could react. Four more long arrows sizzled past Ryson and four more goblins crumpled to
the ground.
Now only half of the goblins remained standing and most of these were now
weaponless. The delver stabbed at those that still held their crossbows. They shrieked in
pain and he offered another warning to them.
“Leave this place and never return!”
Before they could move, yet another barrage of arrows cut into their numbers. Another
four goblins dropped from their feet, dead before they could hit the ground. The
remaining half dozen goblins turned and ran, spitting and hissing in abject fear for their
lives.
Ryson remained still, allowing them to leave and to hopefully spread his warning.
These goblins, however, never escaped Pinesway alive. A final salvo of arrows fell all
remaining creatures.
Ryson shook his head, but turned to greet the friend he now heard walking toward his
position. He returned the Sword of Decree to its sheath over his shoulder, as he put on a
tired smile.
Lief Woodson stalked carefully up to the delver, scanning the area for any more
goblins. His bow remained in his left hand and his right stood ready to draw several more
arrows.
Ryson extended his hand and placed it warmly on the elf’s shoulder. He was surprised
at the tenseness he felt. The silence became surprisingly unsettling as the elf appeared to
almost ignore the delver. If anything, Lief appeared to almost thirst for more targets.
“Lief I’m glad to see you and thanks for the warning, but that wasn’t…”
“Wasn’t what? Necessary?” The elf’s words were cold and seemed in diametric
opposition to the blazing hate in his eyes.
“Well, I’m just not sure if you had to kill them all,” Ryson offered.
“They are dead and we no longer need worry about what they might do. You should
consider that the next time you use your sword upon them. When you strike, make it
count.”
Ryson found the need to defend his actions. “I didn’t want to kill them. I wanted them
to fear this place. I don’t want them coming back, or any others for that matter. If they
reached the forest, they could tell others and rumors would spread through their ranks.”
“Enough of them escaped off into the forest for that.” Lief barked. “Too many, in
fact.”
“Well anyway,” Ryson offered hoping to change the tone of the conversation, “I’m
glad to see you. Why are you here? How did you know I was here? Did Sy send you?”
“I have not spoken to your captain of the guard. I was traveling in the woods hunting a
river rogue I knew to be in this area. From the distance I could see your sword and I
heard the sounds of battle. I joined only a few moments ago. What has happened here?”
“It was the serp, Sazar,” Ryson answered. “He wanted to control what’s left of this
town, use it to entice more goblins to join him.”
Lief’s eyes seemed to burn even brighter. “If I find this serp, I will end his days. Just
as I will end the lives of any other despicable creature I come to pass.”
Ryson found the hatred spilling from Lief’s words more than a bit unsettling. “You
don’t need to kill him. He’s powerless now. The goblins won’t listen to him. They’re now
so afraid of this place that even under his control they won’t enter it. That’s why I didn’t
want you to kill those other goblins. The more that get out of here alive, the more will
pass on the story of what happened here.”
“And the more that die,” Lief retorted, “will mean fewer monsters we have to worry
about all together. It is time we all started realizing this and all started doing something
about it.”
“What more exactly do you think should be done?”
“You have to ask?” Lief asked with near disbelief. “It is time to actively meet their
threat. It is no longer acceptable to wait and hope for the best, to simply to do nothing. It
is time we realized that these creatures are a threat and they must be dealt with.” Lief then
eyed the delver with an expression that almost revealed suspicion. “You can’t possibly
think we should just let these creatures take over?”
Ryson never thought of simply giving up to the likes of Sazar, that was why he was
here. Still, Lief’s answer seemed to swing much too far. “We can defend ourselves
certainly, but hunting them down to simply eradicate them isn’t the answer.”
“Do not tell me what the answer is!” Lief growled. “Trust me, Ryson. This is not the
day to debate with me.”
“It’s not a debate, it’s about unnecessary killing…”
Lief cut the delver off, allowed him to speak no further as his eyes blazed with fury
that Ryson had not seen before. “You’re right, it’s not a debate! This is no argument and
this was not unnecessary killing. It was very necessary. Fire upon you if you do not see!
How many did these creatures kill this day? How many did they kill yesterday? How
many will they kill tomorrow? You can’t answer any of those questions, but I can answer
the last. They will kill no more after today. That is why this is not a debate and I warn
you I will not listen to any further of your doubts on the matter.”
The angry outburst caught Ryson off guard. He stood even more stunned by the tone
and the expression then by the elf’s actual words. Finally, he mumbled a question that
carried as much concern as confusion. “Are you alright?”
The elf’s harsh expression faded a little but the emotion in his voice still boiled. His
eyes bore into the delver for a moment, but in looking at Ryson, he saw and remembered
a friend. The elf bit back his anger enough to offer a limited explanation. “No, I am not
alright. I have been banished from my camp, banished by the very same blasted fools that
did nothing when Petiole was in charge. Now they feel as if they must redeem their
inaction by blaming me. If you are curious as to why I am the way I am now, then I want
it to be clear. I hold nothing against you, nothing in any way, but I will no longer listen to
anything that defends inaction. Doing nothing when evil is committed is as wrong as
committing the evil. These creatures are loathsome monsters that exist to cause others
pain. I will not allow them to do so when it is in my power to stop them. Do you
understand?”
Ryson hesitated, he did not want to infuriate the elf further, but he also could not lie.
“No, I don’t understand.”
The elf nearly exploded. He actually turned his back on the delver as he gripped his
bow ever tighter. He exhaled heavily and spoke without looking back. “Then, you do not
need to understand. As I said before, I hold nothing against you. You have acted far
beyond what has ever been asked of you. You do not carry the failings of my camp. You
and I will simply have to disagree on the matter, but I will not argue the point with you
further. I will not ask for your assistance in what I must do, and you must not try to
interfere. I take my leave of you now, and when I find more evil creatures, I will send
them back to the darkness that spawned them as well. Good luck to you Ryson Acumen.”
At that point, the elf simply stalked away into the growing shadows of nightfall.
Ryson took a quick glimpse around as Lief moved out of sight. He tried to piece
together everything the elf just told him, but he could not fully understand the emotions
he saw.
Suddenly, his thoughts of the elf were washed away by the same reoccurring sense of
emptiness he felt out in the forest with Enin. He felt something beyond empty, something
beyond hollow. Again, the word ‘dry’ seemed to fit the sensation, even though he could
not explain why. Somewhere—and in no particular direction for the feeling seemed to
exist outside of everything physical— somewhere he traced an inexplicable vibration to a
source of energy he could not define.
The sensation and his altercation with Lief left him frustrated. He turned about and
looked into the face of Joel Portsmith who had left his seat on the bench to join the
delver. For now, Ryson put his mind to the safety of those that remained in the square.
There were no goblins left in this area, thus for the moment, they were safe.
Joel Portsmith nodded to the departing shadow of Lief Woodson and decided to add
his own sentiments. “Not that it matters to you delver boy, but I kinda agree with him.”
Ryson gritted his teeth. He didn’t know this man well, but he didn’t want to hear any
more of this. “Well, he was right about one thing. This isn’t the time for a debate.”
“Nope, arguing won’t do any good,” Joel allowed. And I don’t want to stand out here
much longer. Thanks for clearing a path for me. I can get home from here.”
Ryson’s confusion now turned on this baffling man before him. “You’re going
home?”
“Somewhere else I’m supposed to go?”
“I would think you’d want to go someplace else.”
“You think wrong.” Joel stated almost too simplistically.
“Listen, this town still isn’t safe. The place has been abandoned. Just because the
goblins won’t come back, doesn’t mean something else won’t come here looking for a
meal, like a shag, or a river rogue, or something else. There are worse things out there in
the forest, you know.”
“There are worse things just about everywhere.”
“Even so, there’s nothing left here.”
“My home’s here,” Joel stated firmly.
Ryson decided to point out a truth he just recently learned himself. “A home is where
you decide it is, so don’t tell me that. These are buildings, empty buildings that no one is
going to return to, no one with any good intentions.”
Joel shook his head. “I see where you’re going with this and I really don’t want to
hear it. Let’s be honest about this, delver boy, what the blazes else I got left to do, huh?
I’m an old man.”
“Not so old that you weren’t able to survive this attack. You can go to Connel, you can
come with me to Burbon. There are cities to the east and coastal towns to the west. You
can make a new home.”
“I’ve already lived on the coast, not going back. And what makes you think I have it in
me to start over in Connel or anywhere else for that matter?”
“You can start over because you made it through this. If you were going to give up,
you’d be dead already. What makes you think you can’t make it in a new town?”
“Don’t want to.”
“Don’t want to? What is it you want? To stay here and keep fighting off one monster
after another? What happens if a shag comes back or that hook hawk? What then?”
“What then? I’ll tell you what then. I fight them off or I die. What’s the problem?’
“The problem is dying for nothing makes no sense.”
“And who says it dying for nothing?” Joel demanded to know. “My wife and I came
here to live out the rest of our lives. You know what that means, delver boy? It means we
came here to die. Same thing, different words. She held up her part of the bargain. Blast it
if I’m not going to hold up my end.”
Ryson looked into Joel’s dark eyes and he remembered Enin’s words before he left
Burbon, sometimes you really can’t save people from themselves. And sometimes people
don’t want, or even more importantly, don’t need saving. Sometimes people do what they
have to do and you just have to let it go.

Sazar skulked away through the trees of Dark Spruce with the path of Pinesway to his
back. He remained attuned to the rock beetle that tunneled underground ahead of him.
Remaining cautious of ambushes, he commanded the insect to remain on guard for any
trembles of motion. The large shag walked in step directly behind the serp while the
second and smaller shag brought up the rear with only a few dozen goblins in between.
Looking over his shoulder in disgust at the remnants of his forces, he cursed to
himself over his losses.
“Where there were once hundreds, I now have but a meager few. Where I had the
opportunity to grow beyond measure, I now have to struggle to prevent further losses. I
have already lost far too much on this day. The goblins have scattered and now run in
fear of this place. I don’t have the power to overcome this and the cursed delver knows it.
He did this on purpose, striking directly at what I could not control.”
The serp hissed in anger as his tail shredded weeds in uncontrolled waves of anger.
“I don’t think the wizard was even here. Probably felt I was not worth his time. Look
at me now, no longer even worth the delver’s time, or the human guard from Burbon.
They let me creep away in retreat.”
Sazar shook his head and hissed again, this time in disgust. “And so much is true. I am
no longer worth their efforts. It will take all my attention to keep these few that still
follow me from wandering off as well. My hope of Pinesway is gone, my hope of power
is gone.”
Sazar stopped. He turned and looked over the meager group of goblins that moved in
his wake. He grew angry.
“No, I will not allow this day to be a loss. I must accept what happened, and use it as
well. This day has taught me that I can raid, but I can not conquer. Thus, I must choose. If
I am to be a raider, then these forces I have now are more than sufficient. I do not need to
grow in numbers to obtain what I need. If I am to be a conqueror, then I must change.”
Sazar looked back down the path toward Pinesway, unable to even make out the
outline of a single building through the shadows and trees. He had ran from that town, ran
so far he could no longer see it. This realization did not make him happy.
“To be a raider is to retreat, to be a conqueror is to make your enemy retreat. I will
raid no more, thus I will change.”
A decision made in his mind, albeit a dangerous one, Sazar walked with confidence in
his step once more. He hissed a happy consideration as he turned to the southwest.
“Perhaps one day I will be able to thank the delver in person.”

Holli appeared quite at ease standing in Enin’s home. When a large, shaggy-haired
mutt romped up to her side, she confidently dropped a hand down to scratch its head.
“The dogs, they all seem to like you,” Enin smiled.
“I’ve always liked dogs,” Holli replied. “In some ways, I’ve tried to match what they
do. They use their senses in a very positive way and they don’t just rely on one. Even
though many use scent heavily, they also watch and listen.”
“They also have a natural sense of what they like and what they don’t like.” Enin
added. “They are happy when they are around things they like, and they are very tense
when they are concerned.”
As if on cue, another two dogs bounded into to the room. They ran up to the elf, gave
her a sniff with wagging tails, and then leapt over to Enin to say hello. After he
acknowledged them both, they ran over to the large mutt and coaxed him to run out of the
room with them.
“Well, these three seem very happy here.” Holli noted as she watched them gain speed
as they turned a corner and ran out of sight.
“Yes, they are, and it’s funny actually. At first, I hated this house. Too big, too much
room for what I needed. It originally belonged to some well-to-do merchant. Of course
that was before the magic was released. The merchant took off for one of the coastal
towns, Alamatos I think, but I’m not really sure. Anyway, he left when the dark creatures
began appearing. There was a lot of that, people abandoning their homes. Well, not much
here in Burbon really. Most people stayed put here. Probably because of Sy and the
delver. It’s been a blessing that Ryson decided to stay here. We should all probably thank
Linda for that. Uhmmm, where was I?”
“You were telling me how you hated this house,” the elf reminded him.
“Ah, yes. It’s not really my house, well I guess it is now. Anyway, I used to live on
the far side of town and Sy didn’t think that was such a good idea. He wanted me to be
closer to the center. I told him it really didn’t matter, that if my assistance was needed the
distance was quite immaterial. He said it didn’t have anything to do with my powers, but
with the perception of the townspeople. Most of them saw what I did when the dwarves
of Dunop attacked us. Sy said that if people were going to feel safe here, they needed to
have me just about in the middle of everything. If I stayed in the corner of town,
eventually everyone would move to that corner as well. If I came to the center, for the
most part, people would stay put. I asked him how the people that lived at the edges of
town would feel, and he told me that those folks didn’t mind as much. That’s why they
chose to live there in the first place. Made sense to me.”
“The strategy has its logic,” Holli agreed.
“Well, it might have been logical, but that doesn’t mean I liked it. As I said, I hated
this house at first. Much too much space for my needs. I felt lost here. I complained about
that constantly to Sy. I think he got tired of hearing it and it gave him an idea. He told me
the town needed a place to keep stray dogs. There weren’t many strays, of course. Dogs
have become quite popular these days. Did you know that?”
“I know that dogs have a strong ability to sense danger and they naturally sense dark
creatures.”
“You are quite right. And people around here realized that darn quickly. If the family
dog was happy then the other family members knew they didn’t have to worry about a
goblin raid. Thus, not too many strays left running through town. Still, there were a few
and they needed to a place to live, so Sy said they would stay here. Every now and then
things get a bit crazy with the running around and all, but the house doesn’t seem as big
anymore.”
The three dogs that had left re-entered the room with a fourth four-legged friend. All
four ran about the room, excitedly re-inspecting the elf and saying hello once more to the
wizard.
With the dogs leaping at his hands and face, Enin tried valiantly to pet all four at once,
but he was short two hands. He looked back at the elf with a large smile. “In fact,
sometimes now this house actually feels a bit small.”
Holli dropped to one knee, putting her head at the dogs’ level. Two of the four noticed
this immediately and charged her with haste. They began licking both sides of her face.
“They welcome you here.” Enin stated. “That’s very important you know. It’s not
good when someone is suspicious of you when they first meet, sort of like how you were
suspicious of me when we first met.”
Holli stood up but kept both hands available for the two dogs. “At the time, I did not
know you, nor did I know how talented you are with…”
“No, no, no, not talented,” Enin stopped her in mid sentence, “gifted. There’s a huge
difference. Talent comes from within, and there are many that are quite talented at casting
spells. I am not so arrogant that I believe for an instant that my abilities come from
within, or that I should receive credit for what I can do. No, my magical abilities are a
gift from a greater power. I didn’t earn them, didn’t work long hours to perfect them.
They were simply given to me at the outset. I don’t know why, I simply accept it and take
no praise for it.”
“Very well, when I first met you I did not know how gifted you were.” Holli tilted her
head expectantly toward the wizard as if to determine if this choice of words was more
suitable to his liking. When he nodded happily, she continued. “Magic was new to this
world, especially new to humans that had little reference to it in their known history, and
you must admit your manner did not, nor does it now, match that of a wizened spellcaster.”
“I see, so because I did not walk around like a brooding, introspective, aloof human
with very little to say, I appeared somewhat dangerous to you.”
“That is not what I said.” Holli responded in a rather short tone.
“Now, now, if you can’t take a bit of fun, then how are you and I going to get along,
and that will be very important if I agree to what you want.”
Holli frowned at this, and her tone turned slightly colder. “How do you know what it
is I want?”
Enin immediately held his hands up in front of his chest as if pressing away any
hurled accusations. The two dogs at his sides did not sit patiently for this and romped out
of the room, followed by the other two.
Enin’s voice held a very conciliatory note. “Please do not get suspicious of me. I did
not read your mind if that’s what you are worried about. I’ve learned that someone’s
thoughts are very private, but it goes beyond even that. Over time, I’ve discovered that
reading minds is simply not worth the effort. There’s too much chance for error. The
mind is the great cabinet of all thoughts, memories, dreams, and whatever else might
have you. There are things floating around in there that barely make sense to the person
they belong to. Can you imagine how confusing it would be to lift something from
someone else’s mind and try to make sense of it? I’m not talking about perception, either.
You can perceive if someone is angry or happy or upset. I’m talking about actually trying
to read individual thoughts. Perhaps if I could guarantee that I could lift the very thought
you are focused on, it might make sense. The problem is that because there are so many
stray ideas floating around at any one time, I could pick up just about anything and it
wouldn’t necessarily make any sense at all.
“Let’s just say for argument’s sake that I did try to read your mind just then. What if at
that moment you were actually thinking of one of the dogs that was in here, and perhaps
it reminded you of one that belonged to your great aunt. If I ended up picking up that
stray thought and gave it importance, where would that lead me? Would I think you were
here to visit me because I reminded you of your great aunt? Then I really won’t appear
like that wizened old spell-caster.”
“But you do appear to know why I’m here,” Holli persisted not ready to relinquish her
suspicion.
“I believe I do, yes. I think I know what you want to request of me, but I needed to
make it clear that I did not steal your request from your mind before you made it. I had
the feeling that’s what you thought, and I don’t think you and I can afford to have that
kind of mistrust between us.”
Holli’s glare sharpened even further.
“I did it again, didn’t I?” Enin sighed exasperatedly. “I’m speaking as if I know what
you want before you ask. I know I’m not explaining myself well, but the difficulty is that
I do know what you want. I’ve known you would be coming here for some time. In order
for me to explain how I know this, I think we need to speak about fate first.”
Enin looked at Holli and then about the darkened wood walls that made up this room.
“Are you comfortable enough inside to have this discussion. I know elves don’t care for
the indoors.”
“It’s not a problem. An elf guard learns to adapt quickly.”
“Very good, then I will only ask you to please bear with me. Most people say that I
ramble on, and at times it will certainly seem that I might be babbling and not addressing
your true concern, but what we talk about now is very important.”
Holli nodded and waited expectantly for the wizard to begin.
Furrowing his brow, Enin searched for exactly the right way to get his point across.
Unable to find a clear opening, he opted for two quick questions.
“Did you know that we all have a destiny? Did you also know we all have free will?”
He paused a longer period of time and watched her more carefully. She did not speak.
When she appeared to be waiting for further explanation, Enin nodded as if agreeing with
her. “Very good, you’re right in your hesitancy. The two questions alone could be
debated on and on, but if I say them both together, I seem to contradict myself. To say
that one has a destiny and then to say one has free will makes very little sense. They are,
at first consideration, mutually exclusive. If there is a destiny for each individual, then
there is no way we could exercise free will. Free will means making decisions, choosing
between different paths. Destiny means our path is decided for us. How could we decide
a path if that path is already set before us? Our decisions would reflect not our own free
will, but the will of destiny that is guiding us toward our ultimate fate. Reverse it and the
same problem arises. If we exercise complete free will, how in the world could we
possibly have a destiny, a grand purpose that we are designed to fulfill? Any decision we
make could easily send us in the opposite direction from where we were meant to travel.”
Folding her hands in front of her, Holli wanted to quickly put the discussion in
perspective. “Are you asking me if I believe in choice, or are you asking me if I believe
in fate?”
“I’m asking you if you understand it’s possible to have both. I want to know if you
can accept that it’s entirely reasonable to have a destiny and to exercise free will.”
Answering quickly, Holli simply put her own conditions on the dilemma. “It would all
depend on the degree of totality for each. If you are telling me that every single action in
this world is completely based on fate, then free will would be near impossible. The
reverse would also seem certain, that if every circumstance was completely based on the
choices of the inhabitants of this land, then destiny would not be possible. As I
understand fate, there would have to be some kind of guiding force necessary to set the
stage. An external guiding force would be beyond individual choice.”
Enin beamed with delight. “Excellent. You understand perfectly.”
“I’m not sure I understand at all,” Holli exclaimed.
“Yes, you do. You explained it better than I could. It all comes down to the degree of
each. We have choices, absolutely. We can choose how we are going to live our lives,
how we will deal with others, and so on, but we all have challenges we must face,
obstacles to overcome, and events to handle. Some of these we create for ourselves by
our choices, but others we will face regardless of how we live our lives. Just because we
are destined to face some occurrence doesn’t mean we can’t choose how we get there.
And, just because we can choose several different paths in front of us, doesn’t mean we
can avoid the same destiny that waits at the end of each path. That is in essence what you
said.”
“I suppose it is,” replied the elf.
“I actually have a story I like to tell whenever I try to explain this to people. Do you
mind if I tell it now?”
“Not at all.”
Rubbing his hands together, Enin began his tale.
“Imagine there were two men. Each man was destined from the start of his life to be
present at an important event where one of the men would die in a struggle. From the
moment they were born, each man had choices to make and these choices shaped their
lives, but they could not change the ultimate destiny they would eventually face.
“One man chose a dark and evil path. He became a thief and stole from many. The
other chose a respectable path and became a banker. He was trusted by his friends and
associates and became very successful. One day the thief attempted to rob the bankers
safe. The banker discovered him and one of them was killed in the struggle.
“If you are wondering which one died, the answer is that it was the one that was
destined to die. If you are asking was it the banker or the thief, the answer is it doesn’t
matter. They chose their professions and that was based on free will. Their individual
choices made one a banker and the other a thief, but it was destiny that determined which
one would die that day.
“To take it even further, the two men could have both chosen a respectable path. To
that end, they might have both become bankers. Eventually, they would become partners
and one day one would mistake the other for a thief and the event would still come to
pass. Or perhaps, they both would choose the lesser path and become thieves that fell in
together. They would rob the bank together, argue over the money, and one would die.
You see, they both had absolute free will to choose their own path, but neither could
escape the fate of the event. Choice and destiny, both shaping two lives, existing
together—do you understand?”
“Yes, I believe so.”
Enin nodded and then came to the true point of his story. “Then, understand that is
often within my power to see the destiny of others. I do not know why I have this gift,
and I certainly did not ask for it. It is mine, however, whether I like it or not. That is how
I know why you are here. I saw your fate the very last time we spoke. You were returning
to your camp, but I knew you would not be able to stay, I knew you would be returning
here.”
Holli took long moments to consider this and Enin allowed her the time to do so.
When she finally spoke, her tone remained guarded. “Are you telling me that it was my
destiny to come here?”
At this moment, Enin did not shy from revealing even more of what he knew of
Holli’s circumstances. “Yes, I’m also saying you were destined to leave your camp. It
was your choice how it would happen. Of that I am fairly certain. It is possible you
elected to leave on your own, it is possible someone from your camp asked you to go, or
it could be some combination of the two, or even something I haven’t even thought of. It
really doesn’t matter beyond the fact that I knew you would leave your camp and your
position as an elf guard.”
Upon speaking this statement, Enin began to contemplate new considerations.
“Actually, that brings to mind something else that is quite interesting. I’m really not sure
if you were destined to be an elf guard, and I really can’t say why. It might be that I can’t
see every destiny, or perhaps my abilities are limited to those events that occurred after
the release of the magic. I don’t think it has anything to do with past or present or future.
I know destinies that are about to happen and some that are well off in the future. I also
am quite sure of incidents of fate that occurred in past. All of these that I can think of,
however, are in the recent past, not far in the past. And yet, it seems to me that you were
destined to be an elf guard. It makes perfect sense. Even so, I can not say for sure.”
“But you are sure I was destined to leave my camp?” Holli interrupted in an attempt to
bring Enin back to the subject at hand.
“Yes, of course. You were destined to leave your camp and come to me. I can say that
without doubt.”
“And what is my destiny now that I am here?”
“That, I can’t say.”
Holli sensed something in the words of the wizard that made her doubt this statement
and she pressed the issue. “Can’t or won’t?”
“Perhaps both,” Enin answered evasively.
“Now you are talking in riddles and that I do not like.”
“If I am doing so, you will have to believe that I’m doing it with your best interest in
mind.” Enin knew this would not satisfy the elf and he endeavored to explain further.
“Think of the story I told you before about the two men. What if I knew these men and
their destiny and decided to inform them of it? If the banker knew ahead of time that he
would die by the hands of a thief, perhaps that would cause him to alter his actions. Or if
the thief realized the action of robbing the bank was dangerous, he might have chosen
another target. Giving them this information might actually alter a destiny and change the
balance of things. Balance is very important and should not be carelessly disturbed even
for the best of intentions. Does that satisfy you?”
“Only to a degree,” the elf answered. “Why tell me this at all, why tell me of your
ability to see people’s destiny unless you would be willing to reveal what you see?”
“That is simple. As I said before, I know why you are here. I wanted you to know how
I knew this so that there would be no tension between us over this issue.”
“Very well, I can allow that, but it seems to me that if you know why I’m here, then
you already know the outcome of this meeting.”
Here, Enin became stern. “Please never make that assumption. You must never for
one moment believe that I know how all things will unfold. You see, that’s where choice
plays its part. We have a choice in how to deal with events, even events we are destined
to face. We can not avoid our choices, just like we can not avoid our destiny. Since free
will is just that, I can’t state with authority how this meeting will end. All you need to
understand is that I can see certain events in people’s lives that they are destined to face.
That doesn’t mean I know how these events will unfold or conclude.”
“Then how do we move forward?”
“Let us forget destiny and now treat this as we should treat all matters, with an honest
discussion. I will begin by telling you why I think you are here. You have left your camp
and you wish to become my guard. Yes?”
With a nod, Holli affirmed the wizard’s prediction. “I must admit it is rather
unnerving to actually hear this, because I have not spoken it to a single soul, but yes, that
is why I’m here.”
“Fine, we have that out of the way and we can talk of the issue plainly. The truth is I
have questions for you and there are things I would ask of you if you were to take on this
responsibility. If I don’t like the answers, or if you don’t like my conditions, then it is an
arrangement we cannot have.”
“What questions do you have?”
Enin furrowed his brow and did his best to place his questions in the best order. “The
first one I have is why did you leave your camp?”
“The camp elders asked me to leave,” Holli responded without emotion, as if the
request had nothing to do with her personally at all. “They felt they could not lead
effectively with my presence in camp. My role at Sanctum Mountain lifted my standing
among the other elves. They feel that this puts me as part of elflore and would create
confusion. It was not my place to question them. A guard simply does her duty. They said
I must leave, and so I left. They also asked Lief to leave. Did you already know that as
well?”
“That’s hard to answer,” Enin admitted. “I wish to be honest with you, but it’s very
difficult to describe what it is I see. It’s not like I see this big image in my mind of you
and Lief walking out of your camp. It’s more of an understanding. For Lief, I know that
he faces a challenging time ahead.”
Holli nodded knowingly. “He did not leave under the best of circumstances.”
“I imagine not,” the wizard agreed. “Let us, however, return to you.” A light hearted
smile quickly grasped Enin’s lips as if he thought of a funny story. He laughed as he
explained. “You know, that’s actually funny—that I’m the one refocusing the
conversation on the topic at hand. It’s normally the other way around. People always tell
me that I can go off topic and get distracted. It’s not like I mean to, it just kind of
happens. You see, I’m actually amazed at how I see things work. Every thing is
interrelated yet at the same time everything seems to be disconnected. One thing that
happens doesn’t seem to have anything to do with another, but a few seasons later, the
two events come together in one way or the other. It’s like you and I. When we first met,
you mistrusted me. Now, you want me to trust you enough to let you be some kind of
personal guard for me. It’s not that I don’t trust you, we will get to that later. It’s just that
I’m trying to explain how I now see things. That’s why it can seem as if I lose my focus
on things. You’ll have to get used to it if you’re going to spend time around me.”
“Kind of like now,” the elf added with a sly smile of her own.
“Aha, you got me. Seems like I went off topic right after I tried to get us back on to it.
Very good. Yes, let’s get back to you. You left camp because the elders felt you would be
too much of a legendary figure and that would interfere with their ability to lead, yes?”
“Yes.”
“Understandable, but what is not so clear is why you would come here?”
“Because I am a guard, it is more than what I do, it is what I am. I do not wish to
change that. My duty is to keep others safe, thus I considered where I might be most
useful.”
“And you thought you would be most useful protecting me?”
“You are a very powerful wizard and while I do not believe you need protection,
having an elf guard with you would be beneficial to both you and those you serve. There
are many that might come to you seeking assistance or guidance. There are also the
curious that might come to you. Then of course, there are also other wizards that may
come here with less than desirable intentions.”
“Hmmmm, you think I might be called out often by young eager spell casters wishing
to prove themselves? They might wish to challenge me to some kind of wizard’s duel. If
they can defeat me, they might make a name for themselves? Actually, it’s not like that at
all. Many have indeed shown up, but not to challenge me. Most of them just want to
learn. Others want to try and examine me from a distance. I can always sense them and
any confrontation is always rather minimal. I give them some things to think about and
they go on their way. So far, all of them have been satisfied with what I’ve told them.”
“I doubt there is much I could do better in that regard.” Holli agreed. “If I tried, I
would only get in your way, thus I would not even entertain the thought of actually trying
to protect you from a conflict with another spell-caster. That, however, is really not my
intended purpose. When a stranger comes to town to ask for you there are often
bystanders that become curious. I would endeavor to keep such innocents from putting
themselves in danger. A guard protects not just a single individual but the camp as a
whole.”
“Well, we do have the militia guard for that. You’ve met Sy. He is in charge of
keeping the town safe.”
“Again, I would not interfere with him as well,” Holli conceded. “He is able and I
would only be a distraction to him and his soldiers. But I ask you, are there not times that
you are involved in your own matters of magic that you would like to ensure that no one
around you mistakenly puts themselves in harms way?”
“Hmmmm…”
“It is not a matter of me keeping an eye on you. It is a matter of keeping an eye on
those that might stumble upon your presence at the wrong time. This is what an elf guard
has done for ages. While the magic was encased in Ingar’s sphere, we often directed
humans away from our camps without them ever knowing we were there. We kept
ourselves safe by keeping others away, and in turn, kept them safe as well.”
“I understand that,” Enin allowed, “and actually it raises another question. Rather than
come here, why not simply join another elf camp and continue as an elf guard there?”
Holli shook her head. “I discounted this idea the moment I left my camp. Being an elf
guard involves a tremendous amount of trust. There are times an elf guard’s orders will
supersede the orders of the elf council. When the safety of the camp or an elder is in
question, quick decisions must be made and orders must be followed without debate. If I
were to join another camp, my loyalties would always be suspect, and thus, my decisions
would always invite questions, invite doubt. That is not acceptable.”
“Couldn’t they find a position within the elf guard that would give you less
authority?”
“It is possible they could treat me as a trainee, but I doubt I would be able to adjust to
that. While I believe I can adjust to most situations, I must understand certain limitations.
I have spent countless cycles of the seasons as an elf guard relying on what I have
learned, trusting my judgment, developing confidence in my decisions, learning to take
control when necessary. Returning to the level of a trainee would require me to ignore
what I have engrained in my being. It would be as if I asked you to cast nothing but the
most basic of spells and never trust yourself to truly tap into your magical powers.”
“So you decided that if you could not guard another elf camp, you would try to find
someone else that could benefit from your training.”
“Exactly.”
With an accepting wave of the hand, Enin acknowledged the benefits of having Holli
as a guard. “I agree there are times I would like to make sure that no one unexpectedly is
put in any kind of danger. A set of elf guard eyes watching would indeed be an added
benefit. You are indeed well trained and so I doubt I would have to worry about your
safety too often. I am concerned about your level of potential interference.”
“I’m not sure I understand that concern,” Holli responded quickly.
“You just said your orders can sometimes come ahead of even those on your camp
council.”
“Only when safety is a paramount issue.”
Here, Enin shook his head. “That wouldn’t do. You would have to understand that my
safety is of my concern only and your interpretation of a possible hazard to my wellbeing must never override my own. As my guard, your priority would be on protecting
those around me, keeping me advised of surrounding circumstances, being watchful of
hazards I might not see—I can accept all of this—but you must never actively intervene
over my objections simply because you feel my own safety is at risk. In essence, I am
saying that I would always have the final word, even when you think my safety is in
jeopardy. Would you be able to accept that stipulation?”
“I will adapt to that.”
“That is good, but I am also going to have to ask something else of you if you are to
be my guard. It may not make sense to you, but I have my reasons.”
Holli became intrigued but remained quiet.
Enin spoke here with more of a gleam in his eye. “I want to be able to teach you how
to use the magic. Now I know you use the magic passively. You use it to increase your
awareness of what’s around you, you use it to remain alert to possible dangers. I think
you even use it to steady your own inner strength. I must tell you this is all marvelous,
but I would ask more of you. I want to be able to teach you how to use the magic more
actively. There are certain spells I wish you to learn and after I show them to you, I
believe you will agree they will help you in what you view as your duty. If you allow me
to tutor you on casting certain spells, then I will allow you to follow me, guard me, until
your heart is content.”
“I am not against casting spells, and I have done this in the past,” Holli admitted. “I
simply have not had time to truly shape these skills.”
“If you are to be my companion, it is something we will both have time to do. To tell
you the truth, I’m doing it as much for me as I am for you. If you’re going to be around
me, and keeping an eye on me, I think it’s a good idea if we have some common
interests. Otherwise, I’m going to start getting a bit nervous knowing that you’re always
around keeping tabs on me.”
“An elf guard remains inconspicuous,” Holli asserted.
“I’m sure you will be, but it’s better if we actually have some true interaction and I
really can’t think of a better way. You’re an elf and you’re more open to the ideas of
what magic can accomplish than the people I normally talk to. This will give me a chance
to discuss things that I don’t often get a chance to talk about. Such as, did you know
dwarves are very resistant to magic?”
Enin did not wait for an answer. He continued on never giving Holli a chance to
speak. “Of course you knew that, you’re an elf. Sorry. Never mind. The thing is if you
tell that to someone like Sy, he would say ‘Well then use something else on them.’ But
there’s more to it then that. You have to understand magic and how it works. Just because
a dwarf is resistant to magic doesn’t mean he is immune to it. These are two different
things. Being immune is extremely rare. Being resistant means it’s difficult for a magic
caster to hurt you, but it’s not impossible.
“For example, if a sorceress stupidly sends out magic fire from her fingertips to blast
away at a dwarf, the dwarf would just stand there smiling. Of course, there are many
ways around that. You don’t send magic fire at the dwarf, you send it at the air
surrounding the dwarf. Ignite the air and the dwarf won’t be smiling. That’s not just
magic fire any more, that’s real burn-a-dwarf-all-over fire.
“The problem is that this takes more work to do, more power, more magic and
definitely more concentration, but it works where the old magic fire from the finger tips
is just a waste of everyone’s time.
“It’s the same with force blasts, too, you know. You can’t just send out a regular burst
of magic force and expect it to work the same on everyone for all occasions. That’s just
magical power—very strong against most things, but not against those that can naturally
resist it. Instead, if the force is focused on the air which is not resistant to magic, you
create a blast of true power that affects even the magically resistant. When you disburse
the air, keep blasting it forward and forward, that’s a very powerful force. It’s a tornado
that doesn’t spin and if done with enough velocity, it can tear people apart. That’s what I
did to the dwarves when they attacked Burbon you know. Hit them with light and a wind
driven force blast. They were lucky I took it easy on them, but if I didn’t I guess I would
have knocked over every building in town. I don’t think that would have made Sy
happy.”
Enin looked expectantly at Holli.
“So the idea is to use magic indirectly,” she stated simply.
“Exactly,” Enin beamed. “This is what I’m talking about. If you are to be my guard, it
would help us both immensely if we had a common interest. So, what do you say? Are
you willing to learn what I am willing to teach you?”
“Yes. Are you willing to let me be your guard?”
“Absolutely.”

“Why didn’t you tell me you were going off to Pinesway?”
Linda’s question was loaded with danger and Ryson saw now way to avoid any of it.
“It didn’t seem like a good idea at the time,” Ryson offered.
“Letting me know where you’re going is not a good idea?”
“That’s not what I meant. You knew I was out on a scout, and I was continuing that
scout, I was just doing it near Pinesway.”
“No,” Linda said flatly. “You WERE on a scout with Enin. That’s where I thought
you were, with Enin. You came back because you found out something was going on
over there in Pinesway. You left without Enin, on your own, to deal with that. There’s a
big difference, and you know it, so let’s try this again. Why didn’t you tell me you were
going off to Pinesway?”
Ryson tried not to give up so easily on his first excuse. “It’s like I said. You knew I
was out on a scout, you didn’t expect me home until today. Even though I was near
Pinesway, it really did start out as a scout of the town.”
“Look, if you keep this up you’re just going to make it worse.” Linda’s face became
flushed as her anger rose. “You’re playing with words here to try and avoid the issue. If
you want to play this game, I can play this game as well. Yes, I know you were on a
scout with Enin, but did you return to town yesterday or not?”
“I did, I never said I didn’t, but…”
“Did you leave again?”
“Yes, to scout…”
“I didn’t ask you what you were doing. I just asked if you came here and left. When
you left did you leave with Enin.”
“No, he said he shouldn’t get involved.”
Linda was about to continue, but then realized what Ryson just said and seized upon
it.
“Involved? Involved in what?”
“I told you. Sazar tried to take over Pinesway. He wanted to use it as a base for
goblins.”
“So now you admit it wasn’t just a scout. You went out, without Enin, to stop Sazar.”
Ryson held his breath for a moment as he realized his misstep too late. He did his best
to cover it. “Well, I didn’t know what he was up to until I held the sword. I told you that,
too. It started out as a scout. It really did.”
“Godson, Ryson! You’re doing it again. You’re playing with words and trying to
avoid admitting what you did. Fine, it started out as a scout, but it wasn’t an ordinary
scout with Enin out in Dark Spruce. And that’s where I thought you were. But you came
back from Dark Spruce because you found out something was going on with Sazar. You
were scouting Pinesway with every intention of interfering with Sazar and his goblins.
That was the plan from the beginning, even before you held the sword. Right?”
At first Ryson did not wish to answer.
Linda pressed him.
“Right?!”
“Yes, but…”
“But nothing! You can’t even tell me you didn’t have a chance to let me know
because you came back here in between your trip to Dark Spruce and before you set off
again. You were right here yesterday afternoon. And don’t tell me you didn’t have time,
because we both know that’s ridiculous. And even if it wasn’t absurd, you could have
told Sy to send me word. Speaking of Sy, did you know I went to speak with him last
night?”
The delver wanted to groan but he held his breath. “Yes, he told me when I saw him
this morning.”
“Did he tell you I asked him if he knew where you were?”
“Yeah, he said he didn’t say much, tried to be as hazy about it as possible. He said you
didn’t look happy.”
“I’m not happy. Not happy when I talked to Sy, and I’m certainly not happy now,”
Linda stated firmly. “I asked Sy if he knew where you were. All he said was that you
were on a scout. I could tell he was trying to avoid the subject. I guessed you told him not
to tell me, otherwise he would have told me straight out. Am I right?”
Ryson saw the hole just keep getting deeper. There really was no way out so he just
came clean. “You’re right. I told him not to tell you where I went.”
Linda wanted to scream. “Do you know how utterly stupid that is?! For Godson’s
sake, Ry, I work in a tavern. That means on some days I know more about what’s going
on in this town then you and Sy put together. I heard that Enin flew over to Sy’s office
yesterday afternoon. If Enin came back, that meant you probably came back as well.
With a few nudging questions to a few guards, I found out you ran into town in a hurry
yesterday afternoon and left again fairly soon after that in another great hurry. I also
found out no one saw Enin leave with you. Now I find out you actually told Sy to hide
the truth from me.”
“I wasn’t hiding the truth from you. I was trying to keep you from worrying.”
“So that’s what this is all about, huh? You think if you don’t tell me exactly where
you are that somehow I won’t worry?”
“Well, if you know I’m heading into some place dangerous, you’re definitely going to
worry.”
“Of course I’m going to worry!” Linda shouted with exasperation. “And if I find out
where you went and realize you didn’t tell me, then not only am I going to worry, I’m
going to be angry about it as well! You know, this is really ridiculous.”
The delver bit his lip realizing anything he could say at this precise moment would
probably only make things worse. It was a wise decision not to speak at all.
Linda, however, had plenty to say.
“Ryson, don’t you think I know what this is all about? I know you weren’t trying to
keep secrets from me, that you thought you were actually helping me by not telling me,
but we’ve gone through this before. I don’t want you saving me from my own concern
about you.”
Ryson attempted to swing that point to his favor. “Don’t you think there’s a difference
between concern and outright worry? I mean don’t you think you would have viewed this
differently?”
“Absolutely,” Linda responded quickly, “and if something happened to you and I
found out your last thought of me was not to trust me enough to tell me where you were
going, how would that have made me feel?”
“It’s not about trust,” Ryson replied with an edge of anger in his own voice.
Linda did not back down. “Yes, it is! You just don’t understand that yet. I see
perfectly clear what your intentions were, you wanted to protect me, not lie to me. I
understand that. What you don’t understand is that when you act like that, you’re
showing me that you don’t trust me to understand what you are. You’re a delver. I have
accepted what that means. You’re going to go out exploring; it’s what you have to do.
You’ll do your best to tell me where you’re going, but we both know we can never be
sure where you’re going to end up. That’s what happens to you. You tell me you’re going
to scout the hills. Fine, but you and I both know that could last all of two heartbeats.
Suddenly, you catch some strange scent or the trail of something you’ve never seen
before. The next thing you know, you’re out in the Lacobian Desert climbing a sandstone
cliff looking at a razor crow’s nest. You don’t mean to put yourself in danger, but you
also can’t stop being what you are. When I agreed to marry you that was the biggest thing
I had to face up to. I had to ask myself whether or not I could handle the fact that you
would always be running off somewhere, most like somewhere dangerous. If I believed I
could handle that, which I did and still do, well then, I have to live up to it. Do you
understand what I’m saying?”
“I guess,” Ryson said somewhat half-heartedly.
“No guesses, do you understand or not?”
“I understand, but somehow if I agree with you I feel like I’m admitting to doing
something underhanded. That’s why I’m not happy about this. It’s not like I tried to hide
something from you for my own benefit and it’s not like I lied to you. Somehow or other
you have me feeling like I did.”
“I’ll say it again then. I understand you did what you did for me and not you, but that
doesn’t make it right. Don’t ever keep information from me because you think I’m going
to worry. Of course I’m going to worry. I worry every time you walk out that door. You
and I both know we can’t stop that from happening. You’re going to leave and I’m going
to be concerned about you.”
“So where does that leave us.”
“Hopefully, it now leaves us with a new understanding. No matter how dangerous you
think it is, I don’t want you to keep things from me. When you don’t have the opportunity
to tell me what you’re up to, I don’t expect you to catch some pigeon and tie a note to its
leg so you can send me word. When you do have the chance, though, like yesterday
before you went into Pinesway, I want you to let me know where you’re going. You go
on being a delver and do what you do. I’ll go on being a delver’s wife and I’ll do what I
have to do. But in the end we deal with all these things together.”

Sazar had no illusions of his status among those that utilized magic for their own
benefit. He wielded great power—this point was beyond debate. He was a master
manipulator, the magic allowed him to bend the will of countless dark creatures in one
moment. His devious yet quick mind categorized and segmented his minions into
different roles. He was never overwhelmed by the near infinite feedback he received from
their collective thoughts. Instead, he ordered them with perfect genius, prioritized them,
and laid them out intertwined with his own twisted desires. In this, he had no equal, and
that kind of power deserved considerable respect.
The serp also fielded unequal capabilities of strategy, deception and cunning. He
understood tactics with the same perception as a leathered old war general that had
suffered through countless campaigns. While he used logic, he was well aware that most
of his victims acted on emotion, thus he never separated the two from his assessments.
He balanced his decisions on a cruel but perfect utilization of the weaknesses of his
enemies against the strengths of his own forces.
Combine his intellect with his ability to control a vast league of monsters, and Sazar
represented a dangerous threat. To ignore him or treat him as inferior would be a mistake
of incalculable stupidity. An army of minions with powers of their own was at his
command. To anger a serp of this aptitude was to invite a plague of monsters to your own
doorstep—a plague directed with mind boggling genius and without compassion.
Dealing with other magic casters on a one-on-one basis, however, was a different
matter entirely. In a simple contest of spell casting might, the serp would almost always
end up on the losing end. Sazar knew his limits. His spells of pure offensive energy could
not match an even below average practitioner. His defensive skills ranked even lower. He
lacked the pure power to overwhelm, and he was deficient of the skill to outmaneuver.
Remove his near infinite power to manipulate other monsters and reduce him to a caster
of spells, and the truth of the matter was that he was no threat at all.
Yet, what he needed now was exactly what he lacked. While he could manipulate and
control monsters, his power to do so had certain limitations in duration and range. While
in his presence, dark creatures would remain under his will indefinitely. As they ventured
beyond his direct company to carry out his desires, however, they became open to other
stimulus. The further they traveled from him and the longer they were away, the more
likely they would be to fall from his control. In fact, the true size of an army he could
control knew no other limits, but these aspects would always minimize his true potential.
If he had the intrinsic ability to cast spells of power, he could offset these limitations.
The magic could carry his dominion over greater distances and could imprint his will
more firmly in the minds of his minions. In order for him to succeed in this venture,
however, he would need to cast certain spells, and quite simply, he lacked the ability to
do so.
Still, it was his nature and his strength to realize his shortcomings and determine ways
to achieve his objectives. If he lacked the power and ability to cast the proper spells, he
would simply find someone that had such power and ability. His needs were
straightforward. The situation called for both skill in certain aspects of magical power
and reserves of magical energy. He knew the human sorceress in the desert possessed
both. What he did not know was if the woman named Tabris would make the turn down
the path that would satisfy his own needs.
What further presented a challenge was the simple fact that Sazar needed an alliance
with the sorceress free of any manipulation. He had to have her assistance based on her
own will, not his. He did not doubt he could control her if she turned down the proper
path, but the control would only be temporary—the bane of his current weakness. The
moment she gained any semblance of her own cognition, she would attempt to obliterate
him. He could not afford that risk. No, she must be willing to give her assistance to him
freely. Otherwise, he would gain only an interlude of the power he sought. Thus, he
would have to restrain his own true power to manipulate and allow the sorceress to
decide on her own.
He set off to the Lacobian Desert clearly understanding his needs and his mission. He
took with him only the large shag, ordering his other minions to remain within the limits
of the Dark Spruce forest. He focused most of his will on the hook hawk and the rock
beetle. He did not wish to lose control of these two, and he hoped his resolve was strong
enough to keep them in line. As for the smaller shag and the goblins, he believed their
losses could be mitigated upon his return.
Sazar allowed his larger shag to follow as a guard for most of the journey, but as the
serp closed on the oasis deep in the harsh heat, he bade the monster back. If he were to
succeed, to gain the true crux of his plans, he would have to meet the sorceress alone.
The serp wondered if he should approach the oasis without hesitation or simply wait
outside its boundaries for an invitation. On quick consideration, he opted for an
immediate entrance. If he waited, he doubted an invitation would be forthcoming, and if
he appeared to be a distraction, it was most likely the sorceress would use him as target
practice for a lightning spell.
The sorceress appeared before him the moment he stepped passed the dry sandy rock
of the desert and on to the soft grass that surrounded a large pool of water. The oasis
stretched far in every direction. Large boulders that were part of the landscape for untold
generations now stood as silent sentinels seemingly out of place in a lush and cool haven
of thick grass, lazy circling streams, small trees, and a variety of plants and bushes. A
small structure appeared almost hidden among the vines that hung about some of the
larger rocks.
Sazar ignored the wonder of such a green place in the midst of such a harsh
environment. He bowed slightly to the sorceress and directed his gaze toward the ground
before her. He would not speak until spoken to. She would know who and what he was
and he would not risk even for one moment the appearance of trying to sway her.
The magic caster appeared annoyed by the appearance of the serp. Her tone was short
and uninviting. “What do you want?”
“To speak with you,” he replied succinctly.
“About what?”
“About an offer that I have.”
Tabris sighed heavily, obviously further annoyed by now having to waste more time
with the serp. “What might this offer be?”
“I hope you would consider an alliance. I need the assistance of someone with your
capabilities.”
“And what capabilities do you think I have?”
“A very large reserve of magical energies, the ability to cast magical spells that are
focused on wind and storm—as well as spells that are fairly precise but more importantly
deep in range, a willingness to prosper without regard to the consequences it might have
on those that do not matter to you, and a desire to increase both skill and knowledge.
These are the qualities I seek and these are the qualities I believe you possess.”
Tabris frowned but did not otherwise move. “State your offer.”
Sazar had to be very careful indeed at this instant. He was about to request what he
truly needed, what he wanted very badly. At this critical point, he knew that he would
almost instinctively use his power to manipulate and to control. After all, that was how he
always got what he wanted. Unfortunately, he was forced to do more than control this
instinct, he needed to bury it. Success depended solely on him stating his offer as
succinctly as possible and allowing the sorceress herself to decide whether or not to give
him what he wanted.
The task was daunting, but his strength remained centered on his own concentration
and will. Just as he willed others to do his own bidding, he now willed himself to keep his
powers in check.
“I wish to control an army of dark creatures. I have the ability to do so within my
mind, but not the power within my body. I am limited by time and distance. Do you
understand?”
“Of course,” Tabris sighed again, obviously becoming more irritated by the moment.
“Very well, then you understand I have the power to control an army. I do not lack the
concentration. An infinitely growing horde of simple minded creatures at my command is
not beyond my abilities. I believe you know that. The problem is distance, not numbers.
Once my minions move beyond a certain range, they are free to make their own
decisions. And they usually make poor ones. The other difficulty is time. As it passes, my
control also diminishes. It’s almost laughable that I can not overcome these limitations on
my own, but I must admit that I can not, and so I am here.”
Sazar noticed Tabris’ growing impatient and hastened to the crux of his offer. “A
simple spell of wind drift would probably suffice to offset my difficulty in distance. A
sorceress in tune with the power of storm would have no problem with such a spell. If the
spell were cast in such a way that it would carry my very will in all directions, then
distance would no longer be an issue. The spell would need to be open ended and
constantly linked to my own mind, that is why I need a spell caster with great reserves of
magical energy. As for time, another storm spell would be necessary—this one along the
lines of pressure and imprint to allow my will to be more engrained in the minds of my
minions. Again, this spell would also require a constant tap into your powers, but again
only for the sake of that one simple spell.
“With the assistance of these two spells, my weaknesses would be removed, my army
would be limitless—in essence my power would be limitless. We would be able to
conquer as much as we desired. Further, opposed to conquerors that became weakened by
stretching their forces to thin over large areas, my army would achieve just the opposite.
The more we conquered, the stronger we would become. Control over one region would
not lead to conflict within. Instead, it would lead to a larger army and thus more power.
As long as I have the ability to shape the desires of those I wish to control and as long as
you kept that ability from waning over time or distance, there would be no end to our
conquest. As partners in this, we would share in the spoils of what this legion of dark
creatures conquered.”
“This is your offer?” Tabris stared coldly at Sazar. If not for her surprise, she might
have simply obliterated him with the wave of her hand. Still, she could not refrain from
questioning the audacity of the serp. “You offer me nothing and you stand to gain much.
In fact, your offer is less than nothing. To give you want you want would require a
constant drain of my power, a link to you that would add to your strength and diminish
my own energy. This is insulting.”
“No, you have not heard me in full. I will not deny the power I seek will cost you in
magical energies, but even you must agree the total cost would be negligible compared to
your vast reserves. My guess is you would not even notice the drain. I simply require a
boost in range and endurance of my own powers, nothing more. I require no library of
spells, no focus of your attention beyond the initial casting. It is just a simple extension of
my own influence. How much energy would it take from you to cast a continuous spell of
wind drift and a spell of imprint that would be linked to my powers of persuasion?”
“A shred would be too much because I say again I gain nothing from such an effort, so
why should I bother.”
“You should bother because I do offer a gain, a substantial gain that would allow you
everything you currently desire.”
“And how would you know what I desire?” Tabris eyed the serp almost dangerously.
“Simple. I understand logic. I need to in order to do what I can do. Do you disagree
with that?”
Tabris said nothing.
Sazar turned his back to the sorceress and peered out across the vast wasteland that
stood before him just beyond the oasis conjured by the sorceress.
“Why are you out here?” He did not let Tabris answer. “You are here for the same
reason many magic casters have come here, to practice your craft without distraction.
You are growing in power but you lack experience. With each day your understanding
increases, but you are also shackled, limited by the resources you have before you. You
test your skill on empty sand because it offers no resistance and little danger. Spells gone
wrong can do little damage out here. The truth is, however, you crave more. You wish to
build on your spells, build on your knowledge and build on your experience. If I am
wrong, then I shall leave now. Better yet, if I’m wrong simply cast your spell of
destruction on me and I will be no more.”
Sazar waited a scant few moments. He did not worry for he knew his assessment to be
accurate. He continued on with his back still to the sorceress. “The real truth of the matter
is that I would be able to conquer only as long as you allowed it. The moment you felt as
if our bargain did not aid you in any way, you could simply cancel the spell and my army
would be gone, my conquests would be ended. It is, therefore, very much in my interest
to make sure you not only gain at the initial bargain, but continue to gain as time goes on.
“Since I know what you desire, and I know that it is in my interest to make sure those
desire are met, do you not believe that I would have an idea of how to ensure this?”
“I do not like playing in riddles, serp,” Tabris stated, but her tone was not as harsh, not
as threatening. “I asked for your offer. If there is more to it, then I will hear of it now.”
“The offer is as I said it would be. We will share in the spoils of my army’s conquest.
What you fail to see is what those spoils include. With every outpost, town, and city I
take, there will be prisoners, prisoners I have no need for—prisoners I will send to you.
You may do with them as you wish, practice whatever spell you desire, utilize them in
whatever fashion necessary to assist you in gaining knowledge and power. Because these
will be humans from defeated and occupied towns, you will be able to carry out your will
without fear of consequence. There will be no war parties seeking justice, no vengeful
militia threatening to put an end to you. Just as you will give me an everlasting flow of a
very small part of your magical energy, I will give you and everlasting flow of a very
large number of experimental subjects for your magical endeavors.”
Sazar understood choices. He understood them very well. When his true power was
broken down to its most basic principle, it all relied on his ability to manipulate, to steer
his target or victim toward a path that would benefit him the most. There were, however,
some choices that were beyond his power. The all important choices, the choice of faith,
the choice of love, the choice of loyalty, and ultimately the choice between good and evil,
these choices belonged to the individual alone. When an individual faced a choice such as
these, nothing the serp could do could sway that decision.
Sazar kept his eyes away for he knew that Tabris faced such a choice at this moment.
While it was not within his power to force her down the twisted path of dark desires, he
was not above the craving to try. He did not want to allow a lapse in instinct to cause
disaster. This was a powerful sorceress that could incinerate him with a wave of her hand.
He would not risk trying to persuade her in anyway, and he made as much known to the
sorceress without hesitation.
“I must say no more,” he admitted with a candor that was not his natural character. “I
will admit I greatly desire to have this power, so great is my desire I might be willing to
attempt to sway your opinion. We both know we can’t have that. There must never be a
doubt that you accepted this proposal on your own under no influence of my own. I will
give you as much time as you need.”
“I need no further time,” Tabris answered quickly, “and I know you did not try to
bend my will to yours. Had you tried, it would have been the last thing you did in this
life. No, I have decided on my own and I will accept your proposal.”

As Enin opened the front door, Ryson took two leaps back and urged the four dogs
that waited in the doorway to charge him. He slapped his chest and the one that reached
him first jumped into his arms as the other three clamored around his legs. After playfully
rolling the dog back in forth, he let the overjoyed animal slip easily to the ground in order
to let another one jump up into his hands. With that one still in his arms, he bent over low
to let yet another leap onto his back. Once these two were finished, he let them leap away
only to drop to his knees and say hello to the fourth and final dog that nearly knocked the
delver over onto his back.
Enin watched the display only slightly amused. “I am overjoyed you love them so
much, but I really wish you wouldn’t do that. They now think it’s ok to jump on everyone
that comes to the door. It’s very hard on some of the visitors.”
“Bah,” Ryson replied with a grunt while still wrestling with the dogs. “If someone
doesn’t want a dog jumping up to say hello, you probably don’t want them as visitors.”
“Hmmmm,” Enin said while thoughtfully considering Ryson’s reply. “Never thought
of that and you know what? You’re probably right.”
“Of course I’m right.”
“Are you here to take them for their run?”
“That’s one of the reasons.” Ryson stood up and began walking back towards the door
which Enin swung open wider to allow Ryson and the dogs to come through. “I heard
Holli came to visit you and from all accounts she’s still here. If that’s true, I’d like to talk
to her first. Then, I’ll take them for a few laps around the town’s wall.”
“Yes, she is still here. She is waiting for us in the library. And the dogs would love a
run around the wall.”
Enin took the lead and marched halfway through a long hall and made an abrupt right
into a large room with an open door. Ryson followed, but slowed as he saw the elf staring
into a green mist that seemed to reflect his and Enin’s presence like a mirror. Holli’s
hands arched around the mist as if she was holding it in place.
“That’s not bad, not bad at all,” Enin stated with a satisfied smile.
“I wasn’t able to hear anything,” Holli noted as she collapsed her hands to her sides.
The green mist dissipated and soon all traces of it were gone. “I could see you open the
door. I saw Ryson step back and the four dogs went to greet him.”
“Excellent. You saw everything. As to not hearing anything, well you’re not supposed
to hear anything with that spell. It’s a light spell. You are only supposed to see what I
see.”
“For the most part, I could see clearly when I first cast the spell. As you moved further
away and toward the door, the image became slightly less clear. In truth, it was only a
small blur, but enough so that I could notice. As you walked back toward me, the image
became stronger again.”
“That we will rectify with practice and also when you realize to tap into more of you
inner strengths. You have a natural ability to make the spell stronger, you just don’t
realize it yet. You need to focus more on the light that is part of your inner power.”
Holli frowned. “But I cast green magic, not yellow. I thought my power focused on
nature.”
“Indeed it does, but doesn’t nature thrive on the light? What is green but a
combination of blue and yellow? Nature is water and light working together to give life.
So, yes your true strength is in the druidic spells of nature, but you also have natural
abilities for spells dealing with water and light. Casting green magic is a great gift and
you should be thankful for it.”
Holli smiled as she looked to the delver. “Hello, Ryson. It is good to see you again.”
“It’s great to see you. Is Enin teaching you how to cast spells?”
“Yes, he wants to help me with spells that would enhance my abilities as a guard. We
both agreed that a sight spell would be a good start.”
“I guess that will come in handy when you return to your camp. An elf guard that can
increase her sight can only be a benefit.”
Holli said nothing at first. She looked to Enin for possible direction. When he nodded
his head without saying a word, she returned her gaze to the delver.
“I am not returning to my camp. My service there has come to an end. With his
approval, I have now turned my service over to him. As I once supported my camp, I now
avail my abilities as an elf guard to serve Enin, as well as this town.”
Ryson did not appear shocked, but he did take long moments before responding. He
looked back and forth from the elf to the wizard and then stared at the ground as if
considering other details and trying to put them all in perspective.
“Holli, does this have anything to do with Lief?” Ryson finally asked.
“Yes and no,” Holli responded. “Yes in that both Lief and I were asked by the elders
to leave our camp. No in that Lief went his way and I went mine. I never got a chance to
speak to him after he left. He did not leave under the best of circumstances.”
Holli went on to explain all the details she could on what led to Lief’s banishment and
her own departure from the elf camp.
“I met Lief at Pinesway,” Ryson stated after the elf was done. “I know he’s not happy.
He’s actually quite angry. That’s why when I heard you were here, I came over to find
out what was going on. I wanted to…”
Ryson went silent. He said nothing as he stared into empty space. He brought a hand
to his forehead as he tried to get a better feel of what he was sensing. He could not.
Enin had seen this look before.
“The dryness—that was how you put it last time—are you feeling it again?” the
wizard asked curiously.
“Yes,” Ryson admitted. “This is such a strange sensation. The real problem with it is I
can’t even get a hold of where it’s coming from. It just basically appears out of no where.
It’s fairly subtle actually, but when it happens, I can’t miss it. That might not make sense
either, but it’s how it is.”
Enin spoke out loud as he considered his own thoughts. “I wonder if I could trace it.
What spell would it be? It’s not light, but perhaps it’s instinct. An animal spell might
follow it, but then I would have the difficulty of trying to determine which animal. Is it
prey that can sense a predator, or the other way around? It may not even be instinct. I
don’t think it’s elemental so I can discount wind, water, earth and fire. Illusionary also
seems doubtful, but it could be using dryness to hide its true qualities. That might
actually make some sense. What about shadow? But would a shadow feel dry? Maybe.
Then the question becomes how to detect shadow and trace it to an origin. My guess is
the feeling is from within you, so it might build on emotion, but dry emotions would be
no emotions. There are things I could try, but at the moment they would be guesses and I
don’t wish to experiment until I know more. I think perhaps we…”
Just like in Dark Spruce Forest, Enin’s focus on Ryson’s feeling was torn away by a
feeling of his own. The wizard quickly gained an awareness that made him regretfully
cast aside any consideration of the delver’s own sensations.
The wizard’s expression became as serious as his tone. He looked to both Holli and
Ryson with a somber understanding of how the land had just changed. “I am afraid
something has just happened of enormous consequence. I can not explain fully how I
know this, but you must accept that I do. It has much to do with the balance of things and
I am very aware of elements of this nature. The sorceress Tabris, the one both of you
went into Sanctum Mountain with to obtain Ingar’s sphere, has made an alliance with
Sazar. In one form or another, she is now linked with him and thus she has chosen her
path. I can not say where this will lead, I only know that I feel the weight of her power on
the side of evil and malevolence. Her power is great enough and her decision momentous
enough for me to sense this.”
“Do you know where they are now?” Ryson asked.
“Near her new home in the Lacobian desert.”
Ryson looked about as if trying to decide what to do next. “I don’t understand how
you know this, but I’m not going to question it. Is Burbon in any immediate danger?”
“No,” Enin answered with certainty.
“Well, that’s something at least.” Ryson then considered the power Tabris displayed
when she assisted those that entered Sanctum Mountain to retrieve the Sphere of Ingar.
The thought of someone that powerful teaming up with Sazar did not leave pleasant
thoughts in his mind. “The two of them coming together is not a good thing. You have
any idea of what they might be planning?”
“No, only that it will not be in the best interest of the land, but in their own selfish
interests.”
Holli turned to her own training and immediately put the situation in perspective. “If
there is no immediate threat, then there is no need for immediate decisions. We should,
however, inform your captain of this turn of events. He needs to know without delay.”
“I agree,” Ryson added.
“Very well.” Enin turned to Ryson. “I regret we must for the moment forget your
feeling of dryness and address it at another time.”
“It’s ok, it’s gone now anyway. It only lasts for a few moments. We should all go to
talk to Sy. If this is as big as you make it out to be, we all need to figure out the best way
to handle this.”
Ryson looked down at the four dogs that remained nearby. “I’ll have to run with them
later. Sorry guys.”
Enin looked to the animals briefly and then began to walk to the door. “They are
disappointed, but they understand.”
Ryson allowed Holli to follow first but called out to the wizard as they moved down
the hall together. “Are you talking to them now?”
“If I answer that, you might think I was crazy.”

Tabris took long moments of consideration before casting her two spells. A violet
colored diamond appeared around her wrists as she mouthed words in a whisper. The
diamond spun about her hands as it lifted from her hands. With a thrust of her arms the
purple diamond flew into the air. It maintained its shape, but it grew ever larger, its
boundaries expanding in all directions. As its edges rolled out of sight toward each point
of the compass, it left behind a faint shadow of itself. Eventually, this too disappeared.
Tabris looked upon Sazar and again mouthed words the serp could not understand,
words he could barely hear. Another diamond appeared near her hands, a smaller one.
This one held its tight size as she flung it at Sazar.
The serp’s first instinct was to recoil at the motion, but he held his ground and the
diamond caused him no pain when it entered his chest.
“It is done,” Tabris said. “Your will is now connected to the drifting breeze that can
no longer be seen or felt, but still exists. It will carry your power to bend the will of
others for greater distances then you would have hoped. Your will is also now enhanced
with the constant pressure of breath. Those that fall under your control will be reminded
of your orders with every breath they take. Both spells are continuous in their own nature.
The drifting breeze has no end and only death would stop the continuity of breath. They
are fed with my own energy, thus I can cancel them at will. Give me no reason to and you
will find that the creatures you place under your control will remain under your control
no matter how far you send them from you or how long they are away from your
presence.”
“There will be no need to cancel them,” the serp insisted as he stood unmoving while
trying to sense a difference within himself. At first he felt nothing. “You are certain the
magical energy is linked to my thoughts?”
“As certain as I am standing here. Test your new powers now. No doubt you left
creatures with some last orders other than the large shag that stands far out in the desert.”
“Yes, a few.”
“Establish a link with them now. Follow the shadows of your last contact with them in
your mind.”
Sazar focused on the rock beetle. He sifted through the lingering thoughts of his last
contact. As it became clearer in his mind, he seized it and attempted to recreate it.
Instantly, he connected to the rock beetle that was burrowing right where he left it in
Dark Spruce Forest. The beetle became still as it waited for a command. Sazar felt the
presence of the rock beetle as if it stood at his side.
With this connection still strong and vital, he reached out his thoughts to the hook
hawk. Immediately, he linked his mind to that of the bird beast. The hawk perched
quietly in the trees and Sazar could see what the bird saw. Only a dozen or so goblins
remained in the area, and even a few of these were beginning to shy away from the area.
“You are now linked with a few of your minions?” Tabris asked.
“Yes. It is extraordinary that the link is so strong at this distance.”
“You realize that you can use these links to acquire contact with other creatures?”
“No, I did not,” Sazar admitted.
“The drifting breeze is now your vessel. Where it goes, your thoughts can go. You
simply need to focus on the target and your will can reach it. If the minions in your
control allow you to establish the location of a new target, you can flow your will through
them to that exact point. You no longer need to be in the exact presence of a creature to
bend its will to yours.”
That consideration went beyond Sazar’s furthest hopes. Without delay, he tested this
new found power. Rather than attempting to re-establish a link with the goblins using a
past thought from his memory, he concentrated on their location using the images given
to him by the hook hawk. His mind sent out a command to the goblins trying to sneak
away.
Return to your positions and await my instructions.
He watched with glee as the goblins stiffened with fear and quickly returned to the
fold of the other creatures. He then bade the hook hawk to take flight, which it did
without hesitation. The beast circled about at higher and higher elevations. All the time
Sazar focused upon the images of the forest that came back to him through the mind of
the bird. When he saw the second shag meandering west through sparse trees, he
commanded it to return as well. The shag obeyed.
Gleefully, Sazar announced his success. “It is working!”
The sorceress appeared less impressed. “Of course.”
With swift calculation of his newfound powers, Sazar considered one last effort to
test. He had been able to reestablish his will on minions he previously controlled, but
what of creatures with which he had no previous contact. He returned his focus to the
hook hawk. Images of the forest returned to the forefront of his mind and he noticed two
gremplings stalking together through the trees. Gremplings, small but agile creatures
covered in fur with long tails were mischievous in nature and lacked any true power to be
an asset to him, but for now they would serve as an excellent test. Beyond their
nimbleness, they were also fairly intelligent, much more so than the common goblin.
They also had stronger wills and lower levels of fear. With such characteristics,
gremplings were often difficult for serps to control, and because they lacked the horde
traits of the goblin or the sheer natural power of a shag, they were usually not worth the
effort.
It was not, however, Sazar’s desire to add these two to his army for their prowess. It
was his wish to determine just how strong he had become. It would normally take a fair
amount of concentration to bend the will of just one grempling when it was right in front
of him. How would he succeed with two and at this far distance?
He focused his will upon the image of the gremplings in his mind. He reached out to
them and ordered them to hold their position. In his mind, he could see them freeze. He
then sent them an order to circle twenty paces about their current position and scout for
any other creatures in the area. Again, he watched them in his mind as they followed out
his orders.
The sensation was intoxicating to the serp. Not only could he now regain control of
his previous minions with very little effort, he could add to his army without ever having
to venturing out in the wild. The links he could create were far more powerful, the images
in his mind forcibly more vibrant. He could fix his concentration on a group of minions
in one area while still reaping the benefits of incoming sensations of creatures under his
control far off in the distance.
As he expanded his mind to incorporate the links with all his creatures, his own
perspective of the land around him grew with leaps and bounds. In essence, his awareness
of sights, sounds, and scents expanded beyond his own normal capabilities a hundredfold.
For one brief moment, the enormous flow of stimulus from outside forces into his
mind nearly overwhelmed him to the brink of unconsciousness or perhaps even insanity.
If he drank in too much of the inflowing information, he might lose his own place in
reality. He quickly seized on his own surroundings, anchored his physical being to the
actual point of his own existence. Then, he allowed the sensations from his minions to
take their place in his consciousness where he could utilize them but where they would
not overwhelm his own awareness.
“You have done me a great service, sorceress,” Sazar admitted. “And in the process
you have opened great opportunities for us both. I will utilize what you have given me to
its greatest extent, and in return, I will send you whatever it is you need.”
“I expect you shall,” Tabris replied.

“You know, I woke up this morning with a bad feeling that I just couldn’t shake,” Sy
Fenden said as he gazed out into the rolling hills just outside the walls that surrounded
Burbon. Standing in the tower, he could see the edges of Dark Spruce Forest and he
wondered what new problems his town would now face. “You say this Tabris is a
powerful sorceress. Is she as powerful as you?”
Enin stood between Ryson and Holli and he answered Sy directly. “No, but do not
misunderstand. I am somewhat of an anomaly. I don’t wish to sound as if I’m boasting
about myself, but my abilities with magic are on a different scale. You should never use
them in gauging the strength of a potential threat.”
“I’m not.” Sy stated flatly. “I’ve always listened to everything you said and I
understand you’re in a different league, but the first thing I need to know is if this Tabris
is also an anomaly. Now, that I know she isn’t, I still have to get a better idea of what
we’re facing. Does she have the power to destroy this town on her own? I mean, if you
weren’t here protecting us.”
Enin took a moment to consider the question against what he knew of the town’s
defenses. “She could cause considerable damage. She has a natural ability with wind and
storm, and thus she would be difficult for you to fight. She has a great reserve of magical
energy and she has been practicing for many days now. Still, she would have to
overcome much to destroy the whole town. She could destroy the walls and towers with
wind spins and tornados. Many of the buildings she could obliterate or set afire with
lightning. She would be difficult to strike from a distance with bows or slings since she
could deflect many with a wind shield. Your forces, however, would now be prepared for
such and onslaught. If you accepted the losses to the structures and simply remained
patient, you could wait her out. She would eventually tire and then your men would
indeed be able to take her. She could not hold out against you indefinitely.”
“Alright so she can’t just waltz in here and flatten us with a wave of her hand. That’s
somewhat good news.” Sy took another moment to gaze out over the wall and across the
lands that surrounded Burbon. “Considering what you know of her powers, is there
anything that immediately comes to mind that we can do to better our defenses against
her?”
“I honestly do not think she would attempt a frontal assault. She would waste much of
her energy and she would stand to gain very little.”
The news was welcome, but Sy wanted to make sure there was nothing overlooked. “I
appreciate that, but I’d still like to cover my bets. What do you think, anything else we
can do or not?”
Enin joined Sy in looking out across the land. “The best thing to do is remember that
for the most part you would see her coming. Her power is not in shadow or illusion. It is
doubtful she would try to cloak herself. The strength of her magic is force, not deception.
Understanding that a woman walking alone toward the town would not necessarily be a
woman in distress would be the first step in guarding against her. Also, she would have
difficulty with barriers. Well, difficulty in passing them without using magic. With the
magic she can pretty much break through any section of the wall, but it’s not like she can
fly over them like I can. That takes a skill she will not have yet obtained. Nor can she slip
past them in secret, as her power is not in shadow.”
“You’re telling me she can get through our wall, but she’d have to blast through it.”
“Exactly,” Enin said.
“So if she does show up with malice in mind, she’ll have to expel magical energy to
get around any type of barriers we put up. She has—how did you put it?—‘great reserves
of magical energy’ I think is what you said, but you also said we can wear her out. The
more barriers she has to bust through, the sooner she’s going to run out of energy.”
“Correct.”
Sy nodded and again looked to the surround hills. “I was thinking of putting up a new
set of bulwarks. Now might be a good time. The traders aren’t going to like another
obstacle to deal with, but that’s the way it goes.”
Sy took a moment to calculate in his mind where the best position for a new barricade
would be and how long it might take to construct it. He grunted a few unintelligible
words to himself about work details and wood from Dark Spruce.
“There are a few other things that I need to know,” Sy continued as he turned back to
face Enin, Holli and Ryson. “You say that just this morning you sensed this Tabris had
joined Sazar and, as you put it, turned down a path toward evil.”
“Yes, that is what I said,” Enin admitted.
“Well, I have to admit this has me somewhat confused, so I need a bit of clarification
here. If I’m not mistaken you said that Tabris was the one that made Yave into that storm.
That didn’t sound like a right benevolent action. In fact, if you weren’t here when that
happened, Yave would have killed Ryson here and maybe destroyed the whole town. I
would have thought that action would have basically been considered an evil act on its
own. Why is it you think that this morning there’s something different about her?”
“When she turned Yave into a storm, she did so with indifference,” Enin explained. “It
was not her intention to cause harm to anyone. It certainly wasn’t a decision that showed
compassion or kindness, but it was truly Yave that was dictating the path of wickedness
in that situation. For all intents and purpose, Tabris has been, to this point, neutral. She
was not good, nor was she evil. She simply studied her craft in the desert. When she
converted Yave to a storm she did so solely for the purposes of experimentation with her
own power. Today, however, she made a decision that altered her neutrality. Of that, I am
certain.”
“Well, I can’t say I follow you on that one. You’ve talked to me about this balance
stuff on several occasions and I think you’re seeing things way beyond my
comprehension. Still, I will never dismiss your judgment on these types of situations.”
“I appreciate that.”
“I do, however, have another question that regards are friend Sazar. This serp I know
is trouble. He’s been bad news since the first time we encountered him. He led a fairly
significant goblin force into Pinesway just a few days ago. Now, he’s joined forces with a
powerful sorceress. This I know isn’t good news for anyone. Still, he doesn’t come across
as one that would want a partner. From what I know of him, he seems to like being in
charge. I’m guessing the sorceress is far more powerful than he is. Why would he risk
joining up with someone who could order him around and there would be nothing he
could do about it?”
Enin shrugged. “That, I can not say. I have never been very good at understanding
what motivates those that choose a path of evil.”
“Not even a guess?”
“I’m afraid not.”
“How about either of you?” Sy asked as he looked to Holli and Ryson.
Ryson spoke out first. “I just know what I learned from the sword when I was in
Pinesway. He wanted to take over the town to turn it into some kind of breeding ground
for his minions. The sword made it pretty clear to me though that if I put the scare into
the goblins, Sazar would lose out. I honestly believe I did exactly what I had to in order
to kill that plan. I don’t think the goblins are going back to Pinesway anytime soon.”
“Alright, he wanted to expand his army by taking over an abandoned town. That failed
so he joined up with a sorceress. I’m still not seeing the connection.”
Holli offered her own view point. “It may be that he lost much of his forces to
Ryson’s attack and he had no other alternative but to find an ally. It may not be
something he wanted to do, but perhaps he felt it was necessary. Or perhaps it was the
sorceress that pressed the alliance and the serp truly had no choice. How could he fight
her if she is as powerful as Enin says and he had just lost the majority of his own forces?”
Sy raised an eyebrow at the point. Quickly, he came up with a question to test the
theory. “Enin, do you know where they are now?”
“Yes, they are in the desert.”
“This is where Tabris created her home, so to speak, so she could practice, right?”
“Yes.”
“Then I don’t think Tabris forced the issue.”
Enin displayed puzzlement and questioned the conclusion even as Holli appeared
accepting of it.
“Why do you think that?” the wizard asked.
Sy answered rather matter-of-factly. “Well, if they are at Tabris’ home, then we have
to assume that Sazar sought out the sorceress and not the other way around. Otherwise,
how would Sazar have gotten all the way to the Lacobian Desert so fast?”
“I see,” Enin agreed. “Yes, it makes sense. If Tabris sought out Sazar they would be in
Dark Spruce right now.”
“Anyway,” Sy continued, “what we have so far is that Sazar probably ventured out to
the Lacobian and met up with Tabris. He might have been looking for any magic-caster
or he might have been searching for her in particular. We can’t be sure of which. Sazar
met Tabris who is a very powerful sorceress in her own right. Something happened which
led to Tabris making a decision to turn from being a neutral practicing magic-caster to
being an ally of a serp we know we can’t trust and we know wants to cause some serious
trouble. At this point, we really don’t know why he joined with the sorceress or what they
might be up to at this very moment. That’s how I understand the situation. Am I missing
anything?”
“That sums it up very well,” Enin responded.
Ryson perked up as he considered everything Sy just said. “Enin, when we were in
Dark Spruce, you cast a spell that would allow you to see into Pinesway. When I came to
your house this morning, Holli had just cast a spell to see me at the door while she was in
another room. If you can do that, why don’t you cast a spell that would let you see into
the Lacobian Desert right now and maybe we can get an idea of what those two are up
to.”
Sy looked to Enin expectantly. “Can you do that?”
Enin frowned. “Not as of yet. I am still trying to figure out the proper way to bend
light without an anchor point as well as avoiding detection.”
Sy shook his head. “I have no idea what you just said. You seem to be able to cast
some spells to let you look into other places, why not now?”
“Previously,” Enin began to explain, “when I saw into Pinesway, and even when Holli
watched Ryson from a distance, we both used a sight spell that requires an anchor. My
sight spell into Pinesway used my web spell as the point of contact, thus I had already
established a magical connection with certain aspects of the ground at Pinesway. When
Holli cast her spell, she used me as the contact and I allowed her to use my sight. For me
to look into Tabris at this moment, I would have to utilize a similar anchor, but I have no
connection point. I could try to make one with a long ranged energy spell such as striking
a point near her with wind or lightning. Unfortunately, she would immediately sense my
spell. What good is spying on someone if they know you are watching? It would be better
if I could actually see into that part of the desert without casting another spell first. What
I am hoping to do one day is to bend light toward me so that I can actually see with my
own eyes by simply capturing light from a great distance. The spell needs more work at
the moment, but I am getting closer.”
Sy looked intently at the wizard as he seemed to be playing with another thought in
his mind. Enin wondered what the captain of the guard was contemplating.
“What is it?” Enin asked.
“You just said you could shoot a long ranged spell into the Lacobian to make some
kind of magical connection. You said you could cast a wind spell or maybe lightning.”
“That is correct, but Tabris would notice it immediately.”
“What I have in mind wouldn’t matter. If you know where they are and can hit them
with some kind of lightning blast, then why don’t you and we can stop worrying about
this matter?”
Enin’s expression turned to a gray mask of bitter disappointment. “You want me to
just wave my hand and snuff them out like putting out a candle?”
“If you can, yes. That’s exactly what I have in mind,” Sy admitted.
Enin looked at Sy and then shook his head. “You know I get a bit tired of this,” he
said with a huff. “Just because I know where Sazar is right now, I suppose you think I
should send a massive bolt of energy at that spot. It doesn’t matter that I can’t pinpoint it
exactly. All I need to do is make the bolt large enough to make sure it kills him and
hopefully Tabris, too.”
Enin paused to look into Sy’s eyes. When he saw agreement in the Captain’s
expression, the wizard continued explaining his own disappointment.
“Do you really think I can do that? Well, I probably could, but I won’t. I won’t
because I would destroy everything around them as well, the innocent and the guilty.
There is life in the desert, just like there is life in Dark Spruce and just like there is life
right here. An act like that has great consequences, and I’m not ready to take that step,
that’s a step toward disregard, power without responsibility. Do you really want me to be
like that? And if so, why stop there? I can protect every person in Burbon right now by
simply sending out a destructive force that will kill every shag, river rouge, vampire and
goblin within sight of the town limits. It would also kill every bird, every fox, every deer
and every traveling merchant that happens to be in the wrong spot at the wrong time.
Beyond that, there’s the whole concept of balance that you seem to be forgetting. What
happens when I start indiscriminately removing creatures because of their choices? Do I
become the ultimate slayer of all things that don’t choose the path we want them to
choose? And where do you think this evil will go, just disappear? I can tell you it doesn’t
work like that. For every evil creature I destroy, that evil will find a new home, most
likely a more diabolical one. No, it’s not a matter of can or can’t. I won’t do this.”
The mood became somewhat uncomfortable as Enin folded his arms across his chest
and continued to look at Sy with something less than defiance but something more than
disappointment. The captain acknowledged the moment with a will to move on.
“Very well, I’m sorry I asked. I’ll try not to do it again.”
“I would appreciate that.”
“I guess then there’s not much we do about this,” Sy stated. “Sazar and Tabris are out
in the desert and we can hope they stay there. I’ll start planning the new bulwark and
inform all the guards of what we know. Other than that, we just have to hope we don’t
see any trouble from them.”
Holli agreed with the assessment. “It is a sound decision. If we do not go looking for
trouble, we have a better chance of avoiding it. It is also best to remain prepared in case it
comes looking for us.”
Ryson jumped in quickly to shift the focus to a point of his own. “There’s something
that’s been bothering me about all this and I realize now what it is. I remember that when
I was in Pinesway, Lief showed up as I told everyone. Problem is he said he was going to
be hunting the dark creatures. I guess he thinks that’s going to keep him occupied now
that he’s been banished from his camp. But basically, he’s taking just the opposite
approach we’ve decided on, he’s out looking for trouble. Anyway, he said if he ran into
Sazar he would take care of him. He had the kind of look in his eye that indicated he
might not just wait to run into him accidentally, that he might go out of his way looking
for him. If he does that now, he’s going to run into not only Sazar but Tabris as well. He
has to be warned about that. I don’t think I would sleep well if I knew something
happened to Lief because of Sazar and Tabris, especially if I knew I could prevent it.”
“So you’re going to take off after the elf and try and find him and warn him?” Sy
asked with a raised eyebrow.
“That’s the plan,” Ryson said, but then realized Sy looked more than slightly
apprehensive. “You don’t seem happy with this, what’s up?”
Sy continued to press with a suspicious tone. “You’re not using this as an excuse to
scout out the Lacobian and to find out what Tabris and Sazar are up to now, are you?”
Ryson answered firmly without a hint of anything but sincerity. “That’s not my
intention at all. In fact, the truth is I have no desire to go anywhere near the Lacobian.
The only way I’m going to end up there is if Lief is somehow tracking Sazar and has
gotten that far, but I really don’t want that to be the case. I’m hoping he’s still in Dark
Spruce somewhere. Even if Lief is in the Lacobian, I’ll try to get to him before he gets
anywhere near Tabris and Sazar. That way, I won’t have to go near them, either. I have
no intention of getting involved with this sorceress.”
“Let’s hope none of us have to get involved with her.” Sy added. “Are you going to
leave now?”
“In a moment,” the delver replied. “I have to go tell Linda what I’m up to first, I
promised I would. And Enin, the dogs will have to wait for that run.”

“I know it’s a lot to ask, and I don’t know if I should even be asking it at all, but I
thought I would at least talk it over with you. You don’t mind, do you?”
Linda’s question held a great deal of hope, and Enin’s answer inspired even more.
“Linda, you have an open invitation to talk things over with me whenever you want.
Well, as long as I’m not in the middle of trying to cast a new spell. You might want to
give me a bit of space then. I’m always careful, but you can never be too careful.
Anyway, you are a person I would never turn away. I have said it before and to more
people than I can remember. This town owes you a great debt even though they don’t
realize it. Your Ryson is indispensable to us. Many think I am the reason this town still
exists, but they don’t truly understand. Burbon owes its existence to Ryson Acumen and
we owe Ryson’s desire to stay in Burbon to you.”
“I don’t think I want to think of it like that,” Linda stated somewhat hesitantly, not
sure on how to respond to such a statement. “I’m with Ryson because I want to be, not
because I wanted him to save the town.”
“And he is with you because he wants to be, and that’s why he is in Burbon.”
“Well, thank you.” Linda paused as if trying to find the right words to move on to her
request. She noted the elf’s presence in the sitting room. “I’m glad she’s here, too. Ry
told me all the things Holli did at Sanctum Mountain and we all know how she helped out
against the dwarves from Dunop. I think when good people are around, it makes you feel
safer.”
Holli nodded in appreciation of the comment but said nothing.
“What is it that’s bothering you, Linda?” Enin asked. “You can come right out and say
it, and if you can’t explain it as well as you like, we can work with that, too. Remember
who you’re dealing with here. Most people don’t know what I’m talking about half the
time I say something. I just tend to keep blurting things out until it finally makes sense. It
works for me, it can work for you.”
Linda smiled slightly, but then remembered why she came and then any hint of a
smile disappeared completely. “It’s just that Ry told me about this Tabris sorceress today.
He told me that she’s helping that serp, Sazar. He’s gone now, left to find Lief. It’s not
that he went out looking for Lief that’s bothering me. I actually would have expected him
to. He always worries about his friends and it’s not a surprise at all. This Tabris, though,
has me worried.”
Enin pressed forward with a consideration of his own as Linda took a breath and a
moment to try and be more exact in her words. “You worry that Ryson will try to solve
the problem with Tabris on his own? I don’t believe that is the case.”
“No, I don’t think Ry will initiate it, but I have a feeling Tabris will. I’m not even sure
Ry remembers, maybe he does and didn’t say anything because he didn’t want me to
worry, but I remember it. This sorceress didn’t always call herself Tabris. At one point,
her name was Lauren and she went into Sanctum to help destroy the Sphere of Ingar.
Ryson told me that when everything was done on Sanctum, Tabris said she was either
going to kill him or thank him for what she had become. He told me this right after he
came back from Sanctum, almost as if it was an afterthought. I guess at the time, this
Tabris wasn’t that much of a worry to him, just starting out as a sorceress. I think
everyone pretty much dismissed it, but for some reason I never did. Now, you think she’s
doing bad things, joining with Sazar, and who knows what else. It was enough to get all
of you wondering what she might do to Burbon and enough to send Ryson out looking to
warn Lief. If that’s the case, I don’t think Tabris is going to want to thank anyone.”
“So you think she will wish to make an attempt on Ryson’s life?” Enin asked with a
raised eyebrow.
“Maybe, I don’t know, I really can’t say. I just know that the moment Ry told me what
was going on, I dreaded hearing it and I’ve been dreading it ever since.”
Enin spoke with great sincerity as he attempted to do more than simply comfort Linda.
With all honesty, he wanted to convey his own certainty that Tabris would not be able to
harm the delver. “If you are looking for assurances that Ryson is safe from Tabris, I can
tell you that I am not concerned at all with the possibility of Tabris being successful in
killing Ryson. You really have nothing to worry about. You’re only causing yourself a
great deal of unnecessary strain.”
“I appreciate that, but you’re not me,” Linda replied quickly, almost as if she wanted
to explain her terrors more than she wanted to hear Enin’s conciliations. “It’s hard to
explain. There are things I can accept, things I need to deal with whether I like it or not. I
know I am always going to worry about Ryson. There are times I want to be able to help
him, but I know I can’t. He has to go out on his own. He has to go exploring. That’s the
way it is and that’s the way it will be. I know what’s in store for me being married to a
delver. I can live with that, but this thing with Tabris, I never bargained for this. This is
very different, not at all like what I’m used to, and I honestly don’t know if I can handle
it.”
Enin persisted in attempting to relieve Linda’s fears. “Linda, I understand what you’re
thinking, but again I can assure you that at this time Ryson has nothing to worry about
from Tabris.”
“That’s just it.” Linda stopped as a wave emotion carried its affects across her face.
She swallowed hard and forced herself to continue. “I have no idea when it could happen,
when Tabris could strike. You tell me he’s safe now, and maybe that’s true. Maybe I can
even accept it, but what good does it do me for tomorrow or the next day or the next. This
is like a weight on my back that will never be removed.”
Enin started to speak, but stopped before a word came out. He furrowed his brow and
tried again, but once more he couldn’t think of the right way to explain to Linda what he
truly knew.
Linda interpreted this as an affirmation of her own fears. “You see, it really isn’t easy
to deal with.” She paused only for a moment when she wiped away a quick tear. “I want
you to understand that I’m not just being over emotional about this. The land is different
now, and I’ve seen things—we’ve all seen things we’ve never expected. It’s not like we
can just make a wish and all the bad things will disappear and things will go back to the
way they were. We all have to deal with it and I understand that, but this thing with
Tabris—it’s like it’s haunting me. I keep thinking of all the things she might be able to
do.”
Linda turned to Holli. “Don’t misunderstand me. I know there’s good out there, too. I
never knew elves existed. Now that I do, I’m happy to know there are elves out there like
you and Lief. It’s not like I want you to go away.”
“I never thought that,” Holli answered simply.
Linda turned back to Enin. “And I know you are truly a good person. I don’t think we
could have asked for a better person to be the wizard that we all depend on, but this
magic changes everything and I don’t even understand it.”
After taking one deep long breath, she continued in her attempt to explain what was
going through her mind. “It’s going to tear me up inside knowing that some sorceress
might want to kill him. When he goes on a scout, I know he’s careful, I know he can look
out for himself. That makes it easier. But this Tabris isn’t something he can look out for.
And it doesn’t even have to happen when he’s out on his own. It could happen right here
in town when I’m with him and there won’t be anything I can do.”
Linda became more than tearful. She began to cry openly. “I remember when Yave
showed up as a storm. After everything we went through, the town was almost destroyed
by dwarves, Ryson was captured in Dunop, and I never lost hope, until that storm showed
up. I thought to myself how do we fight that, how can Ryson escape that. He can’t.”
“But I took care of Yave, she will never be back,” Enin stated still hoping to calm
Linda’s fears.
“Yes, but Tabris made Yave into the storm and Tabris is still here. Tabris could come
at any time and create another storm or another magical power that I can’t even describe.
What can I do to stop that? What can Ryson do?”
Here, Linda steadied herself and looked right into Enin’s eyes. “You saved Ryson
from Yave. I want you to make sure you’ll do it again, but I don’t want to wait. I can’t
live like that, waiting and wondering when she might strike. I have too much to worry
about as it is with him out there alone all the time. I can’t have this on top of it, I can’t!”
“What is it you would ask of me exactly?” Enin asked without hesitation.
“I want you to tell her. Tell this Tabris she is not to harm Ryson. Tell her you protect
him. Everyone talks about how powerful you are. Even today, Ryson told me not to
worry because this sorceress is nothing like you. I believe that. I also believe that if you
tell her to keep away from him, she’ll have to listen. I don’t know why, but it makes
sense to me. Someone as powerful as you has to be listened to, do you understand?”
Enin nodded. “Yes, I understand and I will do as you ask. In fact, I will do so right
after you leave. I want you to go home and rest. Worry about Ryson in whatever way you
wish, but don’t worry about Tabris any further.”
The room suddenly seemed brighter to Linda, the air lighter, and the world not so
dangerous. She leapt over to the wizard and hugged him gratefully. “Thank you, thank
you, thank you.”

Ryson was both pleased and annoyed when he first returned to Pinesway. Pleased
because most of the corpses had been removed and were not left rotting in the streets.
The cold, dry dormant season air would have kept them from decomposing too quickly,
but the scent of death certainly would have attracted wild animals and who knows what
else from surrounding Dark Spruce. In truth, it almost appeared as if the goblin raid had
never happened. Along with the dead being removed, the crossbow bolts the goblins fired
had been taken from the ground and the walls.
The pleasure from the unexpected clean up was short-lived, and Ryson became
annoyed when he realized that the brigands had returned to claim the city, and thus
probably looted the bodies before they dumped them in the woods. Any weapons left
behind by goblins were now prizes for these bandits.
“So I get rid of goblins and what takes their place? Thieves,” Ryson grumbled as he
moved at a light jogging pace toward the last place he saw Lief Woodson. As he moved
through one narrow street, he could not help but sense a trio of would-be bandits laying
in wait for a wayward traveler. With his disgust surrounding the circumstances of this
abandoned town still fresh in his mind, he decided to see if he could set them straight in
the error of their ways.
He bolted toward their position before they even knew he was there. Two held rough
clubs and the last held on to a crossbow. The bow was now of little danger to the delver
as it wasn’t yet loaded and Ryson stood too close for the thief to get off a practical shot.
With swiftness that left the two club-holding bandits pale, Ryson struck at their wrists
with the edge of his own palm. The stinging pain forced them to drop their weapons. He
then reached over with near blatant disregard for all three of the thieves and plucked the
crossbow from the hands of the leader. He flung it with force against the far wall of an
abandoned building. It shattered, rendering it useless.
Ryson now stood stone still in the midst of the three dumbfounded brigands. He gave
them a moment to collect their senses.
“There’s still three of you and only one of me. Of course, you don’t have your
weapons any more. Oh, wait, let’s make sure of that.”
With speed the villains could not comprehend, Ryson shuffled his feet in two quick
kicks and sent the clubs far out of reach.
The move actually angered one of the men as he felt the kick to his weapon was an
insult to his manhood.
“Why you stinkin’…”
He reached for Ryson, but his hands found nothing but empty air. The delver dashed
around the grapplers opposing shoulder and ended up behind him. With yet another
lightning swift kick from the delver, the angry thief felt a blasting heel to his buttocks and
ended up in a heap on the ground.
The other two decided to stay put. Ryson almost wanted to commend them for their
intelligence, but he doubted they would understand.
“I want all of you out of here. I come back here from time to time and I don’t easily
forget faces. I was easy on you this time, next time I won’t be. Move on.”
Ryson moved right up to the brigand on the ground that had rolled over onto the seat
of his pants. Before the thief could stand up, the delver put his face right to his. The cold
chill in the air was apparent as Ryson’s breath turned into a cloud of condensation around
the bandit’s head. “You understand what I just said?”
The challenge was clear. This wasn’t even the leader of the three, just some muscle.
Ryson had his back to the leader. He did that intentionally. He faced the one he felt was
the most emotionally unstable, the one he wanted to send a clear message. The leader
would be just smart enough to find another town, but the one that initially attacked him
might want to stay to exact some sort of revenge. Ryson wanted to leave no doubt in this
man’s mind that such an idea was not in his best interest.
“You don’t like being on the ground, do you? Well, right now you can get up and
walk away. Next time, maybe not. The two behind me, they don’t matter. Forget them—
forget what they might think or what they might say. Just move on.”
Ryson never took his eyes from the man on the ground as he backed away and
returned to his path toward the center of town. The thought of the now broken crossbow
made Ryson think of the old man he had come across during the goblin raid. He looked
about the empty houses and wondered if any of these were the man’s home. He thought
for a moment about maybe trying to track him down to see if he was still alive, to see if
he needed anything. Then, he remembered how the old man left him and how Ryson
knew there wasn’t really anything he could do for him other than to let him be.
Increasing his speed, the delver quickly reached the town square. Remembering
exactly the last spot Lief Woodson stood, Ryson reviewed the ground, examining it for
the clear signs of the elf’s path. Delvers were not the best trackers as their focus often
wandered, but they had the natural eye to pick up specific traces of markings. Separating
the different paths of goblins, humans, and the elf, Ryson centered his concentration on
the tracks he needed to follow. The trail moved in the exact direction Ryson remembered
Lief used to make his departure, and thus the delver followed it with confidence. He
knew he could at least track the elf through this part of town.
The elf’s tracks were old, but the lack of any true population in the town kept them
clear enough for Ryson to follow. The trail led him through many streets and in an almost
directionless path. Ryson realized why when he noted the elf had stopped on several
occasions to fire his bow, probably at the fleeing goblins. Remembering the anger Lief
displayed, Ryson doubted that any of the arrow shots were meant to do anything but kill.
Following Lief’s path eventually led Ryson to the northwest section of town near the
river. The trail of the elf changed here, becoming more deliberate. Once Ryson crossed
the bridge leading out of town, he picked up a second set of tracks. They were the distinct
markings of a river rogue, complete with clawed-tipped, webbed feet imprints in the
sandy soil by the river’s edge.
“So Lief went after the river rogue and it looks like the rogue took off into the forest.”
Ryson looked into the trees and then at the sky to fix his own position. “Heading north.
At least that’s no where near the Lacobian, and no where near Tabris.”
Ryson headed off into the northern branch of Dark Spruce Forest following the tracks
of the rogue and the elf and hoping that he would find Lief before the trail turned in a
different direction.

Once Linda left for home, Enin prepared Holli for two trips he now planned to take
this day.
“We might as well take advantage of this opportunity to test your new spells. First, we
are going to see Tabris in the Lacobian desert.”
“Before we go,” Holli interrupted, “there is something I have to ask. It is something I
actually suspect. You were very quick to tell Linda that she had little to worry about
Ryson being killed by Tabris. I must admit I was surprised by that. I have always been of
the belief that very little is certain in this land, there are no guarantees. It is something I
had to live by while being an elf guard. We took nothing for granted so we could be
prepared for anything. Yet, you seemed to have no difficulty offering certainty to Linda.
Right now, we know Ryson is looking for Lief and it is not without reason that Lief could
be looking for Sazar. That possibly could bring Ryson right to Tabris. Ryson is very
skilled as a delver but this sorceress is also very powerful by your own admission. Is
there something you know that allows you to be so certain that Ryson is safe from
Tabris?”
“Safe? No, not safe. He may indeed have to face her. Of that, I am not certain.”
“But you are sure Tabris can not kill Ryson; that he will not be taken away from Linda
by the sorceress.”
“Yes, Ryson has a destiny he must still face. I can see that in him. It is something he
can not avoid. Thus, it would be impossible for Tabris to do anything that would keep
him from that destiny.”
“Do you wish to tell me what that destiny is?”
“No.”
“Very well, but why not tell Linda what you just told me?”
Enin smiled at Holli. “You learn about people quickly, don’t you? In the short time we
have been together, I’m becoming more grateful that you are here. The truth is that I
thought of doing just that, thought of telling Linda the real reason she need not worry at
this time. Then I thought how do I word it? Do I tell her I see a destiny for Ryson that he
must meet, and in order to meet it he must obviously be alive? Whatever way I thought of
saying it, it just didn’t sound right. It might have even scared her more than the thought
of Ryson facing Tabris. What would I have accomplished then?”
“Very little,” admitted Holli.
“I also have to remember that the magic is very different with Linda. I’m sure you’ve
noticed that.”
“I noticed the first time I met her,” Holli replied. “She has no reception to the energy
whatsoever. In fact, I believe her essence actually repels magical energies.”
“Your perceptions are right once more. If I cast a spell at her, used every ounce of my
energy, it would not affect her in the least. Magic simply can not enter her being. She
may not acknowledge that she’s aware of this, but I think deep down she senses it. It’s
kind of like everyone is in a rain storm and everyone is dripping wet, except her. She’s
completely dry and she doesn’t know why. Because of that, she has a deeper fear of
magic.
“It doesn’t make sense really. She shouldn’t fear it at all. She’s basically immune to it.
But since she can’t touch it in anyway, she can’t gain even a shred of understanding
about the energy. So what do I do by telling her that the magic allows me to see certain
things that must come to pass? I only make her fear the magic even more. No, it’s much
easier to simply go off and throw a warning at Tabris than to explain to Linda why the
sorceress is not a true threat. If that makes Linda feel better, than it is time well spent. It
may also serve a few other purposes.”
“May I ask what they might be?”
“You may ask, and I will answer because you’re going with me to two different places
today and I want you to know why. When we talk with Tabris, I want to get a better
feeling for her. I want to see if I can figure out why she chose to join up with Sazar. I also
want to let her know that we here in Burbon are aware of this. It’s a pretty good idea not
only to warn her off from trying to hurt Ryson, but while we’re there we might as well
tell her to stay away from Burbon. As powerful as she is, she still won’t want to cross me.
This Sazar is a brazen creature, he moved on Burbon after the dwarves attacked. He
might have new ideas of how to take the town. I want to let them both know it’s not
really something they want to pursue. Finally, I also need to get a sense for something
else. I need to know if someone else might be involved in this alliance of Tabris and
Sazar, and if I can get near Tabris, I might be able to sense something.”
“Who is this someone else? Can you tell me?”
“You will be meeting him in our second trip. His name is Baannat. I am not
completely certain of what he truly is, though I have my ideas. He is a very powerful
sorcerer, that much I do know. He is nearly my exact duplicate in what I can do with the
magical energies. He is also very evil.”
“That’s not very settling.”
“Well, yes and no. It’s never settling to have something that evil being that powerful,”
Enin admitted. “By the same token, evil has to exist for the balance of things in this land
to work. I hope I am on the side of ‘good’. That being the case, there would need to be an
equivalent power on the side of evil. I believe this counter balance exists in Baannat. If he
did not carry this power, it would be carried by others. With Baannat, I know where he is
and I believe I can counter act whatever evil he might attempt. As long as I don’t try to
intervene in this land and try to force my own concept of ‘good’ on everyone, that will
keep Baannat from intervening is his way. If he did, he would tip the balance and I would
have the opportunity to act. If he does nothing, and I do nothing, the balance is
maintained. I’ve tried to explain this to others without actually mentioning Baannat, and
for the most part I get rather perplexed looks. What do you think of what I just said?”
“I think I will be extraordinarily careful when you bring me to meet this Baannat.”
“Yes, of course you would, that’s what you would say. But what of balance, what do
you think of that?”
“I think I know far too little to have any valid opinion on that matter.”
“That’s a very careful response as well.”
“Yes, it is.” Holli hummed in agreement.
“Now, before we go to meet Tabris, I want you to understand how this will work. We
will go to the Lacobian first and deal with the sorceress. I will go first and you will
follow quickly after with a spell I will advise you of in a moment. When we are finished
with Tabris, I will cast a spell that will bring us back here together. I do not wish to leave
you alone in her presence even for a moment. When we have made our return, I will
advise you on our trip to Baannat’s realm. Does this all sound reasonable to your elf
guard senses?”
Holli asked a quick pointed question before answering.
“Will we simply drop out of the blue on Tabris?”
“For the most part, yes.”
“If she is startled or agitated by what she might view as an invader, she might respond
in kind. Will you be prepared to defend yourself against her if she does?”
“Absolutely.”
“This spell I am to cast that will bring me there as well, I have no idea what state it
will leave me in. Will you be able to protect me as well?”
“Again, absolutely.”
“Then I have no reservations at the moment to your plan.”
“This is great; see how well we can get along.” Enin beamed with a glowing smile.
“Now, let us first address the spell I want you to cast. We have talked about it before. By
now you should be much attuned to my energy.”
“I am.”
“Good,” Enin smiled, “because that’s how you will follow me to Tabris. I will cast a
spell I have showed you before—a spell that allows me to move across time and space.
This will bring me to Tabris in a very short period of time. While I believe you could cast
the same spell, it would take almost all of your energy and there is another way to
accomplish the same thing with much less power. I want you to cast an animal tracking
spell, say of a wolf, one that will allow you to track my path. I will leave a wake of
energy that will allow you to ride the waves of my movement as long as you are focused
on my energy. The tracking spell is the vehicle that will allow you to do just that, but it
will be my force that actually moves you. Imagine that you will cast the spell of the cart
and I will cast the spell of the horse. Do you understand?”
“Yes, actually I do.”
“Excellent, then let’s get started. Remember to ride the waves of movement I leave
behind for you, that way you save energy. All you have to do is follow in the wake.”
Enin’s smile grew broader as he turned his palms upward to face the sky. Two circles
of pure white graced his hands and quickly rushed upward in an arc toward the heavens.
His form quickly shimmered into a blurry fog and then disappeared.
“I guess he has faith I can cast the tracking spell,” Holli murmured to herself.
Holli closed her eyes and focused on the head of a wolf and then its muzzle. She
thought of air flowing into the nostrils as she waved her own hands. An octagon outline
of green formed at her fingertips. She kept her hands still as the green energy took the
shape of a wolf’s head that almost immediately darted upon the remnants of Enin’s arc.
Holli felt her body being carried, not by her energy, but by Enin’s. She simply had to
focus on the trail. She kept her eyes closed as she concentrated deeply on her own spell,
fixing an image of a wolf in her mind. The trail itself moved with great speed and force
and it mixed with her own magical energy as it carried her through space and time. She
felt the wind in her face and the temperature turn both cold and hot all around her.
Holli remember the Lacobian desert in her past treks through it with Ryson Acumen.
It was a harsh land, loose sand splashed over hard, sun-baked rock. The blazing sun
seemed to dry every inch of her body and wash out her keen elf vision as the distance
seemed blurred in a twisting, super heated haze. She remembered how the air blasted her
lungs like the opening of a furnace door and she hated thinking about those memories.
Thankfully, however, it was the dormant season and she hoped the place she landed
would be somewhat less hostile.
When Holli felt the movement stop and the land came into a new focus around her,
she looked around in startled amazement. Her surroundings were, in fact, nothing like the
desert she remembered and more like the green lush forest of her elf camp. More
perplexing, however, was that the surrounding plants and trees appeared to be in a stage
of enjoying the late spring as opposed to being in a phase of dormancy. She knew that
Tabris’ magic created this environment, but it was no illusion. The sorceress controlled
the power of the storm and obviously used it to make her Lacobian desert home more
comfortable.
As the elf acquired her bearings, she realized she was near a still but crystal clear pool
of water surrounded by several trees as well as indigenous desert boulders. The air she
breathed felt cool and damp in her lungs as opposed to the searing hot dryness she
expected. Enin stood one step ahead of her and faced a sorceress that appeared very tense
and wore a suspicious expression that seemed to darken her features.
Enin had already begun speaking when the sounds of this place became clearer to
Holli’s ears.
“I’m not here to interfere with your decision,” Enin was saying. “It’s yours to make as
are the consequences that you will ultimately face. It is simply not my place to try to
guide people down one path or another.”
“But you find it your place to invade my home,” Tabris sneered.
“Invade your home? Hardly.”
“What then?” Tabris demanded. “I did not invite you here. You came here on your
own and I don’t want you here.”
“Tabris, what you want is irrelevant to me.”
“So you think you can ignore my wishes?”
“I can. I am here for the sake of others. It is their wishes and their well-being that I am
most concerned—Ryson Acumen for one. The delver is under my protection and my
watchful eye. Burbon is also under my protection, as you must already know. I will not
take kindly to any action on your part that might put my home or my friends in danger.”
“So you come here to offer threats!” Tabris cursed.
Enin grew tired of the sorceress’ angry banter. “I am not going to waste time with you
displaying my powers or challenging you to a duel. You are extraordinary powerful. One
of the most powerful I have seen to date. Still, you are no match for me. A dozen of you
are no match for me. A hundred of you are no match for me. It is no insult to you and not
meant to be one. I am not boasting, and I am not threatening. You and I both know that if
I wanted you removed as a threat from this land I could do so with a mere bat of my eye
and there is not a thing you could do about it.”
“Then why are you here?” Tabris asked with a more accusing tone.
“You faced a choice in which direction you are going to travel, a choice between good
and evil. You chose evil. It was your choice to make and you will live with whatever
comes of that decision. The delver, however, will not suffer from that decision.”
The sorceress while understanding that she was no match for Enin still remained
confrontational.
“Because you say so?”
“No, because fate says so. My time here serves no real purpose in this regard save one.
There are those that think the delver needs protection from you. They want me to warn
you to do him no harm. What they do not understand is that I do not have to protect him.
He is protected by his own destiny. Those that are concerned, however, would not
understand that. They want me to deliver a message to you and I am doing so. I do this
only for their benefit. You and I both understand that my warning truly means nothing to
you. But you do understand the power of fate, don’t you?”
Tabris grimaced.
“Yes, you do. You will not harm him because you now know you can not harm him,
and I see in you that you will not waste your time in useless endeavors. You should thank
me for saving you time and energy.’
“I will not thank you for something I would have discovered on my own.”
“Then perhaps you will thank me for this. I also know of your partnership with Sazar.
The people that guard my home are also aware of it. I do not like this Sazar creature and I
don’t want him threatening Burbon. I may not like to act forcibly on matters, but I am
always entitled to defend my home. In that regard, I do not alter the balance, instead I
maintain it. If Sazar, or you for that matter, decides to attack Burbon, I will ensure that
you fail in the most devastating means available to me.”
Tabris simply glared.
Enin turned his back on her and addressed Holli. “Your tracking spell was perfect.
Well done. My purpose here is complete. Now please allow me to take us both back
home together.”

“The place we are going to does in fact exist, but it isn’t truly in this land, not truly
part of what we might consider our normal every day existence.” Enin wanted to make
sure Holli knew what to expect when they reached their next destination and thus he
continued with his description. “It is a defined space with absolute borders, but it’s
almost as if there’s nothing there. If it made sense to say it was like walking through a
fog you couldn’t see, I would say that, but of course that makes no sense at all. Still,
that’s the sensation you will encounter. As much as you try to perceive anything truly
physical, your senses will be blocked. You will see the figure of Baannat, but he chooses
to cloak himself in the same type of fog. When you look at him, you will see something
of a shadow, but it will remain out of focus. This is really going to sound ridiculous, but
again, I have no other way to describe it. The area has no true light and has no true dark.
You have to remember that there is no sun or stars or bright moon or even a torch for that
matter. Therefore, there is no light. Still, there is magic and so there is no darkness,
either.”
“So I will be able to see, unlike being in a darkened cave, but there will be nothing to
see other than the shadowed figure of Baannat?” Holli asked?
“You put it better than I do. It is not an entirely new dimension. It is more of a pocket
of space. Baannat carved out this pocket for himself so he could exist between our
physical land of Uton and the place where the dark creatures come from. Thus, I am
nearly certain he has some kind of connection to the dark creatures. The area seems to be
affected by most the physical rules of nature that my egghead scientist friend likes to talk
about, but then again, it is not truly a place of physical existence. You will feel as if you
are walking on the ground, but you are really standing and walking on magic. The space
is something like a magical duplication of an empty room right here, but it is not of the
same makeup. That’s the best way I can describe it.”
“This might be difficult for me,” Holli admitted. “While I am trained to adjust to new
surroundings, adapting to such an environment will cause me some instinctive problems.”
“Such as?”
“I am trained to search for dangers and threats, places of safety and paths of retreat
and exit. I will not be able to find any of these in what you describe.”
“That is true.”
“That is what I will find difficult,” Holli admitted. “I appreciate you being honest with
me and preparing me for this before we faced it.”
“I like to help where I can.”
“Thank you. As long as you are willing to be helpful and prepare me for this
endeavor, I have a question which I would like to ask.”
“Fire away,” Enin said.
“How did you find this Baannat, and if he created this space, why does he let you
enter?”
“That’s two questions, but I’ll be happy to answer them both,” Enin replied almost too
lightheartedly for Holli’s liking for a question she felt was extremely significant. “When I
began to understand balance, I actually went looking for him. I figured something like
him probably existed, and if so, it would be a good idea to find him. Searching for such
an entity was actually somewhat easy because of the vast magical energy he possesses.
Similar to the ability to see people’s fate, I also have a deep connection to magic. The
pocket of space he created was fairly easy to find when I put my mind to looking for it.
As to why he lets me come in, I’m really not sure if he could stop me. He never put up a
barrier or anything. I just showed up one day and we started talking.”
“So you don’t really know why he lets you in.”
“No, I guess I don’t”
“Well, then that’s not really an answer is it.”
Enin furrowed his brow. “Hmmmmm, I guess it isn’t.”
“Then you really only answered one question after all.”
Enin laughed.
“Yes, you’re right again, but enough of that for now.” Enin said as he turned slightly
more serious. “Let’s discuss your spell casting. I want you to actually cast the spell that
will bring you to Baannat’s realm. I will go first and you will follow, but you won’t use
the wake of my energy to move you this time. Instead, you will focus on my energy to
guide you, but you will have to cast the spell to actually take you from this place to
Baannat’s. You will be able to use me as a target once I am there. Focus on me and cast a
spell that will bring you to my side. The important thing to remember is that this time
you’re not really moving through physical space as you know it. Baannat is not living in
an area that truly exists in this land. He is somewhat between physical space. You really
don’t even have to concentrate on movement through space at all. What you need to do is
cast a spell that will transport your presence from here to a spot next to mine.”
Holli stood still and quiet as she tried to get a handle on the aspects of the spell Enin
described. After a few moments, she voiced her concerns. “I think I understand what you
said, but I’m not sure how I can cast a spell to accomplish the task. In the other transport
spell you taught me, the one where I can move myself and others across the land in a very
short time, I learned to focus on channeling the magic to a specific area. From there, I
would form a straight line in my mind between the two points of where I currently stood
and where I wanted to go. When I had the line in my mind, I simply shortened it as much
as I could. Basically, in my mind I compacted the space between the two points while
still maintaining a concept of travel from one place to another. It worked for me, though
it wore me out, took most of my energy.”
“That won’t happen with this spell, at least it shouldn’t take much of your energy at
all,” Enin interrupted. “As I said, you’re not going to require the energy to move you
across time and space. This is not a spell that will move you as we understand movement.
This should be a spell that simply transports you from one spot to another. You are here
and then you are there. No movement in between.”
“That’s the problem,” Holli stated firmly. “With this spell you want me to cast, I can
see you as the target but I don’t know how to draw the line between where I am and
where you will be. I won’t have a true reference point in my mind.”
Enin shook his head and attempted to be clearer in what the elf had to do. “That’s
because you’re still trying to force this into a time and space move as opposed to a sheer
transportation spell. You do not create a line because there will be no line. You simply go
from one point to another disregarding the space between.”
“But if there are two points, then there should be space between them,” Holli argued
holding to her own concepts.
“Not when one point is not in the same frame of existence as the other. Think of it this
way, pretend you can only draw your line with ink on a piece of paper. That works fine
when you want to travel from one spot on the paper to another. You can draw the line
with ease. In this case, however, one point is on one piece of paper, but the other point is
on an entirely different piece of paper. You can’t draw your line under these
circumstances, but the two points still exist. You just have to transport yourself from one
piece of paper to the other. Does that help?”
“Slightly,” Holli allowed, but continued to voice her difficulties with the spell. “My
problem is that if I don’t draw the line in my head, I honestly don’t know how I get from
one point to the other. That’s my sticking point.”
“I see,” Enin allowed as he rubbed his chin. “Well, the truth is this is a difficult spell
for you to cast. It is a combination of different magical aspects, and they have little to do
with your primary powers. Shadow is prevalent in the spell because you are in essence
transporting yourself to a place that is a whisper reflection of this land. Light is involved
slightly as an offset to its natural opposite shadow but more importantly in how the
yellow aspect is included in the orange aura of energy and movement. The orange power
of energy will guide and bring you to me while the gray essence of shadow will let you
pass into this other plane of existence. I know that doesn’t sound very clear but that is the
essence of the spell. Because you cast with a green aura, it is difficult for you to see the
underlying aspects of the gray and orange energy types that are involved in the basics of
the spell. Let me see if I can help you with that.”
Enin took a candle off the desk in front of him and lit it. He held up the flame for Holli
to see. “We know the flame exists because we can see it and feel the heat from it. Still, I
can pass my finger through it as if it were not there. If I take another candle and hold the
wick to this one, another flame is born. If I then hold the two candles apart, there are two
separate flames. When I bring the candles back together and hold the wicks next to each
other, the flames merge into one again.”
Enin walked around the desk toward Holli. “Now, look at your shadow on the ground.
It has no substance, no depth whatsoever, but you can see it is there. When I stand here,
my shadow is separate from yours. If I walk toward you, my shadow combines with
yours and neither of our shadows is the same as it was. When I step away, our shadows
return to the outline of our individual shapes.”
Enin stepped back and let Holli examine the change in their shadows on the floor. He
then pointed to her shadow. “The source of light that creates your shadow is in front of
you, so where is the shadow?”
“Behind me,” Holli answered.
“That is correct, and if I circle you with a candle, the shadow rotates around you. It
moves on the floor. Now let us change the conditions of the light. If a candle that was in
front of you is immediately extinguished and another light is instantly lit behind you,
where would the shadow be?”
“In front of me.”
“Think very clearly on that,” Enin pressed. “The shadow was in front of you and then
behind you. It did not move in a path around you to get from one place to the other. Your
shadow shifted from one place to another without actually moving through space.
Though it did not actually follow a path, or a line, it did change positions. It was here,
and then it was there. Do you understand?”
Holli nodded and her expression appeared as if a cloud was slowly lifting from her
mind.
Enin continued. “The concepts I tell you should let your mind gain a spark of
understanding of energy and shadow. They are certainly complex topics when it comes to
magic. What should help you in casting this spell is understanding that just because
something has no substance doesn’t mean it can’t exist. Also, the lack of substance
allows for shifting motion that is not bound by the same restrictions that objects of solid
material face in this existence. So, when I ask you to consider the spell of transporting to
my side, you have to think in terms beyond the movement spell you have already learned.
You must focus on allowing the magic to do what it is capable of doing and that’s
bringing you to me without actually traveling though space and time. Just like a shadow
can jump from place to place, you can jump. In this case, the magic will be like the light
source. Let the magic worry about the details of how it happens.”
“Are you saying to simply focus on the desired results and not the method?” Holli
asked with a new glint in her eyes.
Enin’s eyebrows shot up. “Yes, that’s an excellent way to put it as long as you
understand that you have to shape the magic in your mind to do what you want. You
can’t simply say ‘Take me to Enin’ and poof you will be by my side. Anyone can do that.
The question is can you grasp the concepts of energy and shadow magic in such a way
that you can cast a spell that will bring you to me, wherever I am.”
“Yes, I believe I can. As long as I don’t worry about the mechanics of how it’s being
done, I believe I can call on the magic to bring me to your side. All I have to do is focus
on your magical essence, as long as you keep it open to me.”
“I will indeed,” Enin allowed. “Are you ready to give this a try?”
“Yes.”
“Excellent. I will transport myself to Baannat. Once I am gone, you can cast your spell
and you should immediately appear in Baannat’s realm. If for some reason you fail, do
not worry. I will give you a few moments and if you don’t appear, I will summon you to
my side. I don’t think that will be necessary because looking at you now, I believe you
know what you have to do.”
“I believe so as well,” Holli stated confidently.
“Before we go, let me warn you not to speak to Baannat. Listen to everything he says,
but say nothing. Ok?”
“Will I be able to speak to you if necessary?”
“Absolutely. If you have something you need, or a question, don’t hesitate to ask. I
just would prefer if you didn’t speak to Baannat.”
“Very well.”
“Then let us get this over with.”
Enin raised his hands above his head and two circles of white quickly encased his
entire body and he disappeared.
Holli immediately focused on Enin’s magical essence. She could feel his power but
could not place it in any particular location. It was almost as if he was in the air over her
very head. She ceased trying to put a known location on Enin’s presence and simply
focused on appearing at his side, as if she wanted to send her own shadow next to his
with a bright flash of magic. She mouthed a few whispers and she disappeared in a mist
of green.
Holli appeared in a space of bland white with no other color. She could see, but other
then herself, Enin and a shadowy figure off in the distance in front of them, there was
nothing else to focus on. It felt as if her feet stood on solid ground, but she could perceive
no floor. There appeared to be walls, but she could not gauge how far the walls were
from her current position. She considered pulling an arrow from her quiver and firing it
off into any direction simply to see where it might stop, or if it stopped at all before it
flew out of her range of vision. She decided quickly against the action, for she could not
be certain of how the magic of this space would affect the path of her arrow. She
wondered if it might end up coming right back at her.
Holli’s contemplations over this strange place were brought to an end by the first
words she heard from Baannat. These words did more than echo through this magical
space, they vibrated, and she could feel them to her very bones.
“Hello, Brother. I didn’t expect you to visit again so soon. And how are you this day?”
Enin wanted to ignore Baannat as he concentrated on what he could sense around
Baannat. He filled his being with the magic that made up the place. He felt for any
whispers of deeds that might link Baannat to Tabris. Still, he responded for he knew
Baannat would only continue to harass him.
“I’m fine, Baannat.”
“You bring a new visitor with you. An elf, how wonderful. And you are teaching her.
Splendid. Of course you know that doing so will only make you weaker by your own
theory. If balance must exist and you strengthen this elf, then you would have to become
weaker, or there would be no balance. Or perhaps instead of you getting weaker, I would
get stronger. That is what you believe and that is a pleasing thought, is it not?”
Enin answered with near disregard, as if he was talking to nothing more than empty
space. “She has always had the power to cast spells and she has always been on the side
of virtue in the balance of things. Yes, she will grow in power but not so much to make a
true difference in the scales.”
“Has he spoken to you yet of balance, my dear?” Baannat’s words were clearly
directed at Holli now, and they were both hot with desire and cold with hate at the
moment he spoke them. “He loves to speak of balance. One might say it even consumes
him.”
“She is not here for your amusement,” Enin intervened.
“Then why is she here?!” This time Baannat’s words carried nothing but anger.
“Because I want her to see this place, to know it.”
“And why is that?!”
“Does it really matter?” Enin asked.
There was complete silence for just a moment that was quickly shattered by Baannat’s
nearly uncontrollable laughter. The bubbling howls of mirth rumbled through the air like
rolling thunder from incessant lightning strikes.
“No, it doesn’t matter at all,” Baannat finally said through his slowly dying giggles.
“And why are you here again so soon?”
“Events continue to occur that make me suspect you are up to something, Baannat.”
“Checking up on me again, making sure I’m being good. Isn’t that wonderful? Or
perhaps maybe you’re trying to provoke me into interfering in your activities so you can
do some interfering of your own? What are the events you speak of this time?”
“If you are involved, you would already know. If you are not involved, then it is none
of your concern.”
“You think you can keep secrets from me?!” Baannat shouted.
“I simply have no desire to tell you anything.”
“But you tell me everything by just being here.”
Enin brushed aside the comment with his own understanding of reality. “You can see
into the land as easy as I can come here. If it is truly important for you to know, look into
it yourself. I won’t bother to stop you.”
“Perhaps I don’t need to look, perhaps I already know,” Baannat offered deviously.
“And now that you are here, do you sense anything that gives me away.”
“No, I do not,” Enin admitted.
Baannat waited. “It seems you are done with your task which means it is time for you
to leave, and yet you make no attempt to exit. Normally, you are quick to try and go
before I make my request for our game. Not this time, eh?”
“If you wish to play, I’m ready. I always humor you.”
“Humor me?” Baannat growled. “It is not humor that makes you stay this time. No,
you are worried because you think that by teaching this pathetic elf you have given away
too much of your power. You want to play this time to see if you can still win, but now
you worry you can’t. You think you have changed the balance.”
“The balance has most definitely changed, but not in the way you think,” Enin stated
confidently.
“Has it?” Baannat suddenly giggled. “Then let’s truly test this. You will cast black
magic, the aspect of death. And I will cast white magic, the constant of all magic
combined. I admit I am giving myself an advantage. I will cast what is my natural gift,
and you will cast that which you oppose the most.”
“I do not oppose the black aspect of magic,” Enin countered. “It is not just death.
Death is only a part of it. It is change.”
“And I am well aware that you dislike change,” Baannat shot back. “Change upsets
you. Change brings turmoil and takes away that which you like most, consistency.”
“Not all change is bad. Learning is change. Teaching is causing change. Helping is
creating change. I’ve never opposed these things.”
“Then let us put this to the test,” Baannat demanded.
Baannat brought his hands together to two tight fists in front of his chest. Two rings of
white hot power encircled his shadowed figure. They revolved about him in opposite
directions until they met at his fists. When they did, they formed a glowing white axe,
massive in size. The blade shone sickly pale as if covered in angels’ blood. It began to
swing back and forth, then up and down. With each pass, it left a trail of white energy
that gleamed brighter then the rest of the pale space.
Enin nodded and quickly cast his own spell. The wizard’s own circles of white energy
quickly turned black and melded together to form a large block. The rectangular shape
swam out into the empty paleness of space that surrounded them and headed for the axe.
The axe head swung through the black shape, cleaving it in half. The two now
separate shapes quickly ballooned in size, each now matching the width and height of the
original block. Both blocks again moved through space following the white hatchet.
When the blade swung again it sliced through two blocks instead of just one, and thus,
there were now four black pieces. Again, all four grew back to the size of the original
block. The process went on for long moments and countless swings of the blade. The
number of blocks grew exponentially and began to erase the bright whiteness left behind
by each swing of the Baannat’s magical weapon. Before the cleaver completed its final
swing it was clear that Enin’s dark blocks overpowered the white remnants of Baannat’s
blade swings by an obvious margin.
“This can’t be!” Baannat wailed. “You should be weaker, not stronger!”
Enin shrugged. “It is rather appropriate you asked me to cast the magic of change, for
that is what has truly happened. The balance between you and I has been altered to offset
the new evil that now resides in Uton. It is nothing less than I expected.”
“But what of your elf witch beside you?” Baannat protested. “She should have swayed
the balance to me!”
“As I said before, she was always on the side of righteousness. Her increased strength
did little to alter the scales.”
Enin turned to Holli. “I have learned what I wish to know here. I will take us back.”
The wizard placed an arm around Holli’s shoulder and with a simple step of will he
guided her back to their home in Burbon. He looked her in the face as he tested her
awareness.
“Are you alright?”
“I’m fine,” Holli answered.
“Very good. I am happy to see you were able to cast the spell. Your power is
growing.”
Holli ignored the compliment and instead focused on the wizard’s expression as she
asked a question of her own.
“Why did you bring me to see Baannat?”
“Because I believe it was important for you to see him for yourself, to know that there
is evil out there. You can never be blind to that fact. Awareness of it will allow you to
defend yourself against it.”
Enin said nothing further.
Holli realized it would be futile to press him for greater details. Instead, she asked a
new set of questions
“Why does he call you brother?”
“Because he knows it irritates me. I am not his brother. I am not related to him in
anyway. He just likes to point out that we have similar powers.”
“Do you think he’s involved in Tabris joining Sazaar?”
“No, I do not think so. I scanned the magical energy that was in the room when we
entered. I could find no echo, no whisper of a link between Tabris and Baannat. I also
sensed nothing when we visited the sorceress. If he had intervened in some way, I believe
I would have sensed something, a trail of his magic. I did not and so it appears as if she
made the decision on her own. It is also as I suspected in that Tabris’ decision has altered
the balance of things here in our existence. Her previous neutrality had no affect on the
struggles between right and wrong, mercy and torture, forgiveness and vengeance—
basically good and evil. That is now changed and as a counterbalance to that change,
Baannat has weakened.”
“Or perhaps you have gained strength,” Holli offered.
“Maybe. Either way, I now hold the advantage over him.”
The two said little more about the encounter, but back in the Baannat’s pale realm, in
the fading residue of black and white magic, Baannat snickered.

The majestic Colad Mountains stood in the far distance and Ryson enjoyed gazing at
their imposing outline whenever such a view became possible through the thick woods.
The crisp, clear air of the dormant season and the bare trees allowed him more than a few
passing glances at the northern ranges whenever he ventured up to a treetop to get a better
view of the surrounding terrain. With each glimpse to the northwest, the delver knew the
mountains saw far more than their normal share of extreme weather during this dormant
season. Heavy snows filled not only the peaks but also far down the mountain sides. Even
at the tree line, the thick white snow cover blotted out nearly all signs of green, brown or
gray.
These were the days Ryson loved to travel in this region. The daylight was short, and
the air was brisk, but the land around him sparkled with life even as much of it slept in
dens, burrows, or under blankets of crusted snow. The normally thick underbrush of vines
had withered and fallen away during the end of the harvest season as did the leaves of the
low hanging branches. Paths for roaming existed in nearly limitless directions, and the
delver felt the call to explore many new trails several times during his excursion. With a
mind toward finding his friend, however, the delver ignored these calls and kept an eye to
the fresh tracks on the ground.
His journey kept him in Dark Spruce Forest, and though Lief’s trail continued in a
round about pattern, it remained to the northwest of Pinesway. At no point did Ryson
ever fear that the elf had made a turn to the south and a possible encounter with Sazar and
Tabris. Heavier snows in this region made the trails easier to follow as it seemed neither
the river rogue nor the elf took the time to cover their tracks.
Still, the tracks of the elf appeared somewhat confusing. Lief’s trail followed that of
the river rogue, apparently stalking it for a kill. It seemed quite clear to Ryson that many
such opportunities arose for the elf to strike, but as far as the delver could tell, Lief never
made the attempt. All the markings indicated that Lief simply continued to follow the
beast, making no sincere effort to end the chase. Adding to the confusion, there were
signs the elf had indeed fired his bow, but when the delver strived to learn the target, he
always found the corpses of goblins, tree rakers, bloat spiders, hobsprites, and once even
a snow ogre that must have ventured far from its natural mountain habitat. Every monster
appeared to be felled by one of Lief’s arrows, yet the river rogue continued unabated on
its own path, at times even feasting on some of Lief’s kills.
The afternoon sun hung low in the western sky when Ryson slowed his movements.
He heard rustling sounds in the distance and the cackling squawks of tree rakers. Such
shrieks had become common in this area of Dark Spruce since the return of dark
creatures, and Ryson knew enough to remain careful when he heard them.
Tree rakers depended on the heavy growth of forests to do most of their work for them
and on the panic of their prey to make their hunt successful. Thick and bulky as well as
slow and ponderous, rakers hunted knowing they could never catch even the slowest of
their intended victims. Instead, they created traps on well worn paths, and their cackles
frightened potential prey into making mistakes that would cost them their lives.
As powerful as full grown shags, tree rakers were enabled with the strength to knock
over small trees no matter how well rooted into the ground. Rakers normally worked
together in small packs, usually numbering four or five. Pushing together small trees that
sprouted up along the sides of wild deer paths, they quickly turned a once free and long
standing trail into a corral that led to a dead end trap of intertwined branches and
impassable tree trunks. As rakers where not choosey in their diet, they would wait for any
potential prey—human, wild animal, or even dark creature—to venture into the area.
They would then begin their shrieks sending the intended victim into a panic. Taking
strategic positions to block off other exits, they hoped to compel their prey down their
prearranged path. The frightened victim would become so distracted with the clamoring
cries, it would never notice the trap that awaited at the end it until it was too late. The
group of rakers would fall in behind their victim, blocking off any escape.
Short in stature, wide in girth, and with the thick wrinkled hide that looked much like
tree bark, rakers could blend in with the forest during any season. Still, they made more
than enough noise to make their presence known. At the moment, they were not close
enough to the delver to present any immediate danger, and as long as Ryson moved with
reasonable care, he would be able to avoid them with ease.
On previous trips to this region of Dark Spruce, the delver spent time becoming more
acquainted with the calls of rakers. Ryson had now listened long enough to this pack to
know they were not hunting. They had caught the scent of a danger and were trying to
frighten it away.
“Probably the rogue,” Ryson whispered to himself, “or maybe even Lief, but whatever
it is, they want it out of here.”
Quickly gauging the tracks on the ground and considering what was most probably
ahead of him, Ryson took to the trees. He grabbed a low hanging branch and hoisted
himself up into a box-elder. He jumped another two branches upward before moving
along a thick limb to a neighboring cottonwood. He gauged the distance to the rakers
cries and moved with a greater speed knowing he would not fall into one of their traps.
After but a few moments, the delver closed upon the clamor. He quickly spotted the
river rogue that appeared particularly agitated over the noises of the tree rakers. Though
visibly tense over the chaotic sounds, the rogue remained in a fixed position, slightly
hunched over and using a fallen, rotten log that was lodged between two full grown white
pines as cover. It showed no desire to retreat or to bolt for better cover. Instead, the rogue
continued to peer to its left toward a thick grove of spruce trees.
Ryson followed the rogue’s gaze to the same spot. As he eyes fell upon the thick
branches, he noticed the barely visible signs of slow, steady movement from within.
Almost immediately, Ryson witnessed an arrow fly from out of the spruce trees and with
deadly malice toward one of the rakers. The arrow stuck clean on the side of the
creature’s head, and the dwarf-constructed metal arrowhead penetrated the raker’s skull
with ease. Only half of the shaft remained visible after impact, the rest burrowed deep
into the monster’s brain. The creature dropped to the ground with a dull thud. Death was
instantaneous.
Ryson shook his head and then bounded through the trees towards Lief’s position in
the spruce grove.
“Lief!” he called out.
The elf’s head popped out behind cover just as the screeching of the other rakers in the
area ceased. The pack members that remained alive scurried off as fast at they could
deeper into the cover of the woods.
As for the rogue, it appeared somewhat uncertain of its next move. It didn’t like the
smell of the delver that now approached, nor did it have any desire to follow the
remaining rakers into the woods. In the end, it appeared satisfied to remain behind the
rotten log, and it simply crouched lower to the ground as it waited for any further signs of
action.
In mere moments, the delver was in front of the elf as he extricated himself from the
thick branches of the spruce.
“Ryson?” Lief asked, revealing more surprise than any other emotion. “What are you
doing here?”
“I’ve been tracking you. I heard the noise of the rakers and then saw the arrow and
realized I found you.”
The elf looked over toward the dead raker. “One less monster to worry about. These
dwarf constructed arrowheads can break through rock, so they have no problem with the
tough hides of tree rakers.”
“Or the hides of goblins, bloat spiders, and even a snow ogre,” Ryson added with a
hint of displeasure.
Lief didn’t notice the tone, or he chose to ignore it. “That was a pleasant surprise—the
ogre that is. Didn’t think I’d chance upon one of those so deep in the forest.”
Ryson found Lief’s rather upbeat response somewhat perplexing. “What are you doing
out here?”
The elf raised an eyebrow as if the question was unnecessary and the answer obvious.
“I told you exactly what I would be doing when I left you at Pinesway, and if you’ve
been tracking me, you should be able to tell by the trails. After dispatching as many
retreating goblins as I could find, I set my sights on the river rogue that setup a territory
near Pinesway’s northwestern bridge. It was already highly alerted to much of the
disturbance when I came upon the bridge. Once it smelled my arrival, it took off for the
woods. He was obviously spooked by the goblin attack, perhaps also by your activity,
and thus made haste to leave the area almost immediately. I have been tracking it since
that time. He has proven to be a difficult quarry. He left his territory in quite a hurry and
has showed no great desire to return quickly. At least on two different occasions, though,
he did try to double back to Pinesway. I had cut him off and almost had him, but both
times the blasted wind changed and he caught either sight or scent of me and fled further
into the forest.”
Lief pointed the top of his bow at the creature as he continued. “He’s over there now,
much more used to my scent at this time. He’s probably wondering about you, though.
Still I don’t think he wants to leave my vicinity too soon as I’ve been providing him with
several easy meals lately. I’m actually quite happy it got away. It seems to have given up
on returning to its river bridge by Pinesway. Instead it has staked out a rather large
territory here in the woods. There is a small stream off to the west where it started
digging out a new den. There’s not a lot of water for it, but the forest has enough snow on
the ground here for it to make due. I’ve been using him to track goblins and other such
creatures. The rogue stalks when it senses prey nearby but does not strike. It leaves that to
me now, almost as if it knows I will take care of the killing for it.”
Ryson looked over to the rogue. He felt sadness for the creature, but said nothing.
“You were tracking me I assume for a purpose,” Lief stated. “May I ask what it is you
want of me?”
“Mostly, I wanted to warn you,” Ryson acknowledged.
“Warn me?”
“Yes, when we met in Pinesway, I told you about Sazar the serp. It seemed to me you
might go out of your way to hunt him down. After I returned to Burbon, we learned that
he has teamed with a sorceress and I wanted you to know that. If you started hunting the
serp, you might have stumbled on a dangerous situation.”
Lief frowned then glared at Ryson. “You see what happens when you don’t act? You
let evil get away and it only gets stronger. Perhaps I shouldn’t have wasted so much time
on the rogue or perhaps I should have taken care of the serp first while I was still in
Pinesway. The rogue would have waited. Blast all of this!”
Ryson did not know what to say, and thus, said nothing. Lief, on the other hand, just
seemed to get angrier.
“Why is it that evil is allowed to prosper? Why must it be that creatures like Sazar can
not only get away with directing the death of innocents, but can then benefit by the help
of a sorceress. Where is the justice in this?” Lief bit down hard in frustration but then
turned his questions directly to Ryson. “Does anyone know the power of this sorceress,
who she is?” Lief demanded.
Ryson, knowing the answer, was now even more hesitant in responding, but he
eventually spoke honestly.
“Actually we both know her,” the delver finally admitted. “It is Lauren, the one that
was with us at Sanctum. Remember? She changed her name to Tabris when she left us.”
“Yes, I remember well and I’m not happy about this, either.” Lief then shook his head
in absolute disgust. “It seems every time I turn around I am reminded how things tend to
only get worse. If I remember correctly, she began at the outset with a great capacity to
utilize the magic. How much of a danger is this sorceress now?”
“Enin says she’s not in his class, but that she is quite powerful, powerful enough to
cause a great deal of damage if she put a mind to it. Beyond that, I can’t say.”
Lief’s hands clenched into tight fists. “Well, at least I know what I must do now.”
“What’s that?” Ryson asked quickly, and then wondered if he really wanted to hear
the answer.
Lief spoke as if his next actions would be as simple and as obvious as crossing a road
in the deserted town of Pinesway. “I will track this serp and this sorceress and I will put
an end to their evil before too much damage is done.”
“Well, they really haven’t caused any damage yet. I’m not sure if it’s the best idea to
go looking for trouble.”
“Looking for trouble?” Lief appeared nearly baffled. “Is that what you think I’m doing
is looking for trouble? Who caused the trouble in Pinesway?”
Ryson decided to be forthright and pointed out what he saw to be the truth. “I won’t
argue that Sazar and the goblins started it, but you didn’t have a problem with finishing it.
It seems to me both you and the goblins caused your share amount of death there.”
Lief’s eyes narrowed. “What would you have had me done, Ryson Acumen? Perhaps I
should have just swatted them on the back side as they raced back into the woods after
killing a dozen or so humans. Would that have been a fair punishment?”
This time Ryson could not find the words to answer the elf, but Lief continued without
waiting for an answer. “And what do you think I should do now that I know this serp that
controlled these goblins is now in league with a powerful sorceress? Would you have me
just sit back and wait for them to destroy everything in Dark Spruce before someone does
something to stop them?”
“But we don’t know if they’re going to destroy Dark Spruce,” Ryson finally protested.
“In fact, the last I heard, they were still out in the Lacobian.”
“Then I will go to the Lacobian.”
“Do you think that’s really necessary?”
Lief’s frown grew deeper as he could not fathom why he had to explain this to the
delver. “The magic has only returned for a few short seasons and already this serp has
caused nothing but evil. This Sazar creature threatened your own home town of Burbon
to gain access to the tunnels dug by the dwarves. It plundered Dunop when it had the
chance, then it moved on to try and take over the town of Pinesway. Its minions left many
dead in the streets, or did you already forget?”
The image of the dead became even clearer in Ryson’s mind. “I didn’t forget.”
“Should the serp not pay for his crimes? Should he be allowed to simply do whatever
he likes without consequences?”
These words struck Ryson rather hard. He clearly remembered what the serp did at
Pinesway. It was Sazar’s orders that led to many killings, killings that were barbaric in
nature. Ryson certainly believed Sazar should face repercussions for his actions, he just
wasn’t sure if Lief running off to the Lacobian was the right way to go about it.
“That’s not what I said,” Ryson finally spoke out. “I didn’t mean the serp shouldn’t be
dealt with. Sazar is a threat and he does have to answer for what he’s done.”
“Then why are you trying to stop me?”
“Because it just sounds wrong how you’re going to go about doing it.”
“Then tell me your answer as to how it should be done. Will this wizard of yours, this
Enin, will he handle the situation?”
Ryson looked down to the ground becoming more frustrated by the moment. “No, he
doesn’t think he should get involved.”
Lief almost laughed. “Not get involved? That’s what Tun said when the sphere first
freed itself. He didn’t want the dwarves to get involved. He would have had all the
denizens of Uton destroyed by the dark magic if he had his way. Not get involved? That’s
what the elders of my camp insisted when I wanted them to intervene in Petiole’s absurd
behavior. And so they did nothing. So do not tell me that that’s your answer, that you
think I shouldn’t get involved.”
“Look, Lief, I don’t know what the answer is. I just came out here to warn you of
what’s happening. I didn’t want you to get caught by surprise. I guess I’ve done that. As
to what you do next, I guess that’s up to you.”
“Indeed it is up to me.” Lief exhaled heavily and then seemed to lighten in mood ever
so slightly. “I appreciate what you have done for me here. You have done so out of
friendship. I realize that, and I thank you. What I do now, I do because I feel I must. It
has nothing more to do with you. Do you understand that?”
“I guess so, though, I don’t understand much of anything anymore.”
The elf looked about the forest, momentarily stared at the corpse of the tree raker, and
then cast a wary eye toward the river rogue. “These are complex times for us all. Still, I
can not simply do nothing now. I had a chance to deal with this Sazar and I missed that
opportunity. I now feel it is my obligation to keep him from doing as little damage as
possible. I assure you I will act with care and hopefully I will succeed in doing what must
be done.”
Ryson looked across the forest at nothing in particular. He felt almost ashamed of
what he was about to say, but he knew he had to say it. “I can’t go with you, you know. I
don’t know how to argue with what you’re doing, but something about it just doesn’t
seem right.”
“I am not asking you to join me,” Lief said with almost a shrug. “I will track these
villains in the Lacobian on my own. I am not sure how I will deal with them as of yet, but
I must at least try. First, I must dispatch this rogue.”
Ryson’s gaze quickly shot toward Lief in utter dismay. “You’re going to kill it?”
“I’m responsible for leading it out here into the forest,” Lief responded flatly. “I won’t
leave it here to wreak havoc.”
“Wreaking havoc? What are you talking about?”
“A river rogue is a dangerous creature with the ability to kill many innocents. It must
be dealt with.”
“Why? Because it has the potential to kill? You can’t kill it just because it might do
something in the future.”
“What else will it do? You think it has the ability to offer any thing constructive to this
land?”
Ryson would not give up this time. He believed killing the creature would be a
dastardly act and made his feeling evident. “You worked together with that creature.
Dark creature or not, it does not deserve to be killed so callously. You call these things
monsters, fine, but they have their place here just as the rest of us. It was hard for me to
argue about Sazar because he has committed crimes, but tell me what this creature has
done that you haven’t. It has hunted to survive. In its last few days, it hasn’t even killed.
It has left that task up to you. If you want to send it to its death simply because it’s
dangerous, then maybe you should save an arrow for yourself.”
Lief stood with eyes blazing, but said nothing.
“Here’s what I think, Lief. I’m not exactly sure why you’re so angry at the land. You
want to be angry at the elves in your camp, that’s one thing. From everything I’ve heard,
it sounds you have the right to be more than just a little annoyed. Godson, I was furious
with your camp when they allowed Petiole to drop the seeds. Still, I don’t see how that
gives you a free hand to become a cold blooded killer. If you kill this river rogue, that’s
what you will become.”
Lief’s voice was cold and any glimmer of friendship in his eye vanished as if blown
away by a bitter wind. “And when this rogue ventures back to Pinesway and maybe all
the way to Burbon and kills some child, who will be the cold blooded killer then? The
monster for one, but what about you for defending this thing when I could have dealt
with it appropriately?”
“Did you hear what you just said?” Ryson asked nearly overwhelmed by Lief’s
reasoning. “You think this creature is somehow going to travel all the way back to
Burbon just to kill a child. That’s more than a stretch, that’s an outright fairy tale.”
“Fine, it stays here and kills a traveling merchant. Does that please your sense of
reality?”
“It might be more realistic, but it might never happen either. You seem to want to
damn this creature to an act just so you can justify your wanting to kill it. You know as
well as I do this creature may do nothing more than hunt goblins and tree rakers like the
one you just shot. You can’t punish something just for what it’s capable of. We’re all
capable of doing terrible things, that doesn’t mean we’re going to actually do them.”
“Rogues are killers and thus deserve to be treated as such,” Lief stated with near
disdain.
“Are you becoming a killer?”
“You think I take some kind of joy out of doing this?” Lief shot back quickly. “That I
am doing it for a thrill? I hate each time I have to fire my bow, but I would hate it more if
I did not. I didn’t ask for these creatures to return to the land, but they have, and so they
must be dealt with. In truth, I am as much responsible for anyone for their return, or have
you forgotten that I was with you in Sanctum?”
“I didn’t forget, but I also didn’t forget that the magic returned to the land before we
even set foot on Sanctum’s base. The sphere somehow blew a hole through the side of the
mountain and dark creatures had returned before I even met you. We had nothing to do
with this, so if you’re trying to take blame…”
“I take no blame,” Lief interrupted fiercely. “I take responsibility! And because I
realize my responsibility I have to act. I will not be like the others, others that I’ve
watched and done nothing while everything around them screamed for them to act.”
“So you’re going to save Uton all on your own and that starts by killing that rogue?”
“It starts by me doing what is necessary even though I might hate having to do it!”
Lief screamed. “Have you heard nothing I said? Fire upon you, delver. I don’t wish to kill
the blasted rogue, but I will not have its acts of murder on my conscience.”
Lief said nothing further. He pulled an arrow from his quiver and prepared to nock it
in his bow. He spit upon the ground in angry frustration as his hands shook slightly from
his emotions.
The delver watched wide-eyed for only a heartbeat. In a flash of movement, he dashed
to his left and grabbed a solid broken branch from the forest floor. The branch was long
and sturdy, freshly broken off a nearby maple tree, probably by one of the tree rakers.
With this crude staff in his hands, Ryson ran toward the river rogue, remaining well out
of its reach, but between the dark creature and the elf.
It seemed almost as if the elf did not understand the delver’s intentions. Lief raised
his bow, took aim at the rogues head, and fired his arrow. It never reached its target. As it
sizzled through the air with deadly accuracy, Ryson turned his weight to one side while
he swung the heavy branch upward in a long arc. The lower end of the crude staff
shattered the arrow in mid-air.
Ryson quickly turned about to gauge the reaction of the river rogue. It remained
crouched and unmoving, but watching the delver with a hungry stare, as if it expected
Ryson to become its next meal once he was stricken by one of the elf’s arrows.
Realizing the rogue would stay put, Ryson turned his attention back to the elf. “I
won’t let you kill it. I can protect it as long as I have to. How much time and how many
arrows will you waste trying to do what you know you can’t?”
Lief’s response was as quick as it was cold and hateful. “Fire upon you, delver! If it
was not for your past, I would seriously consider firing the next arrow at you. Fine, you
wish this monster to live, then you take responsibility for it. I leave any future evil it does
on your conscience, not mine. The blood is spills will soak your hands as well as its own.
At the very least I can say I tried to remove this monster before it committed any further
acts of violence. It was you that saved it. Think hard on that.”
Lief disappeared into the trees, heading south with the Lacobian desert as his ultimate
destination.
The delver looked first upon the elf’s back as Lief climbed into the trees above. He
then cast a glance to the river rogue that appeared more confused that the delver had not
yet fallen. Ryson looked at the claws and the razor sharp teeth and knew the thing had to
eat. He sighed heavily and wondered if he made the right decision.

Sazar left Tabris in her desert oasis as he returned to Dark Spruce to begin his new
grand designs of conquest. He promised the sorceress that he would not take long in
culminating his plans into action and fulfilling his part of the bargain. He did not,
however, wish to utilize the desert as his base of initial operations. His conquests would
begin with the humans, and for that he would drive eastward.
Even as he trekked back through the outskirts of the Lacobian and into the western
span of Dark Spruce, Sazar utilized his new found powers to expand his small group of
minions into a massive horde. The hook hawk under his control soared over vast regions
of the forest. When it spotted small camps of goblin raiding parties, Sazar focused his
persuasive will through the gaze of the flying beast. The members of the goblin cluster
immediately fell under his spell. Once he gained access to their consciousness, he
obtained information on the location of competing goblin packs. He directed his winged
monster toward these new locations and his minion army grew as fast as his hook hawk
could fly.
He sent his smaller shag into the rocky hills in search of more of its kind. Shags in the
area would immediately sense the invader and come out to meet the challenger to protect
their territories. The smaller shag would never have to fight the larger and more massive
monsters that railed against it. Once the small shag locked its gaze upon the targeted
creature, Sazar’s conniving mind would take the will of the monster and another powerful
beast would be added to his army. Within days, Sazar controlled over three dozen shags.
Their combined destructive strength could destroy a dwarf constructed barricade in a
matter of moments. He now had a mobile battering ram capable of dismantling any
barrier.
The two gremplings he first tested his powers on also became very useful. These furry
almost imp-like creatures bounded through the forest, swinging from tree tops searching
for bloat spiders, the perfect nightmares to add an edge of fear to his multitude. After all,
in order to be ultimately successful in his plans of conquest, he needed not only to defeat
the initial resistance, but to break the will of those he intended on ruling. Bloat spiders
were almost too easy to control. They spun thick webs and waited for days for prey. Their
minds never focused on anything beyond that. Persuading them to move with his army
required little more than the promise of endless prey.
As the serp walked through Dark Spruce, he kept his own eye upon the skies always
watching for razor crows and hook hawks. Whenever he spotted one, he immediately
placed it under his control and sent it to reconnoiter more and more of the forest. With a
murder of razor crows and numerous hook hawks delivering images to his own mind, his
awareness of the forest and his perception of the surrounding lands grew to god-like
proportions. Secret entrances to dwarf mines, hidden trails to elf camps, and guarded
meeting places for the two races became as obvious to him as the full moon in a cloudless
night sky.
He moved his horde with precision, keeping the mass spread thin. He no longer needed
them near his physical presence to maintain his control of their thoughts, and he used this
to his advantage. Ensuring that he would alert no one that he now controlled massive
army of countless creatures with varied strengths and abilities, he kept small detachments
separated across the vast forest. He would bring them together eventually, but only when
he was ready to attack. For that, he needed to move them further eastward and equip his
forces for an overwhelming onslaught.
With a desire to make his first assault one of such overwhelming fury, Sazar’s greatest
obstacle was arming this vast horde of goblins. Most had some sort of crude weapon
when he persuaded them to join his league of minions. For what he had in mind,
however, this was not enough. He wanted each goblin to carry a crossbow and a short
sword of iron at the bare minimum. He wanted the bolts made of metal as well. The
number of goblins he controlled soared into the thousands and equipping them beyond
simple daggers or crude clubs proved to be a near impossible task. Though they raided
several human outposts and two dwarf underground mining stations, he still had many
more goblins than weapons. In the end, he ordered many to construct short bows from
tree limbs and to carve wooden arrows from broken branches. Not quite what he first
envisioned, but it would be enough, enough to obliterate the defenses of his first target
and enough to make it clear that his army was never to be trifled with again.

When Linda recommended they take a walk outside Burbon’s walls, she thought the
open air would lift Ryson’s spirits. Instead, it only seemed to take his focus further away.
As they walked about, Ryson often turned from her and stared out into the distance. She
grew tired of looking at his back and so she walked around in front of him and looked
him in the eye.
“Alright, enough of this. You’ve been like this for days now. What’s bothering you?”
she demanded in a caring yet serious tone.
“It’s hard to explain really.”
“Try.”
“I guess I’m worried about Lief. I’m sure he’s reached the Lacobian by now. I can’t
help thinking something might have happened to him.”
“That’s not all of it and I know it,” Linda pressed. “I know you’ve been worried about
Lief since you got back. I understand that and we’ve already talked about it a lot. You
know you can’t stop him from doing what he wants to do. You even talked to Holli and
she thinks he won’t do anything too risky. You agreed that now that he knows this Tabris
is with Sazar he’s going to be extra careful. That seemed to make you feel better for
about half a day, but then you went right back to moping around again. That has me
completely confused because as far as I can tell you’ve accepted the situation as it stands,
but something is still eating at you and I want to know what it is.”
“The whole thing is eating at me,” Ryson offered as if hoping that a general statement
of concern would suffice.
Linda would not let it stand that way.
“That’s not a big help to either of us. Look, I’m going to keep badgering you until you
finally admit it, so you might as well save us both a good deal of aggravation and start
talking about it to me instead of keeping it bottled up inside.”
Ryson kicked at the dirt. Part of him wanted to take off in a flash and not deal with
what was on his mind, but he knew Linda would simply wait for him to return and she’d
be back at it again. She was persistent and so he began to explain.
“For the most part, you’re right. I’m worried about Lief, but it’s not like I really have
a choice about stopping him. He made that perfectly clear.”
“So what is it then?”
“It’s about why he said he was going to the Lacobian,” Ryson finally offered. “I’ve
been thinking about what Lief said to me. What he’s doing is dangerous, there’s no doubt
about that, so there has to be a reason for it. I really think part of why he’s doing it has a
great deal to do with his anger over his own camp. But he didn’t explain it that way to
me. He gave me some solid reasons for going after Sazar. The thing is that when I think
about those reasons, I start wondering.”
He paused and looked over to the southwest. He grew quiet again as his expression
turned more sullen.
“Don’t stop now,” Linda insisted. “What is it you’re wondering about?”
“What bothers me most is that he might be right,” Ryson admitted. “Sazar had a lot of
people killed in what’s left of Pinesway. He shouldn’t be allowed to get away with that.
He needs to be punished. That’s not all he’s done, either. He threatened our town, looted
the dwarf city, and who knows what else. Still, it’s almost as if he’s not on our doorstep
right now, we don’t have to worry about him. Like it’s not our problem. Something
seems very wrong with that.”
Ryson went even further with his analysis of the situation. “Maybe what Lief is doing
is something we all should be doing. If a member of this town did what Sazar did, he
wouldn’t be allowed to walk around free. Even if he left town, Sy would send out a party
of his men looking for him. If he got away, they would make notices of the man’s name
and a description of him and send them with other mail to town’s all across the region.
We don’t let people that commit crimes just walk away, why are we letting Sazar get
away with what he’s done?”
“So you think you should go out and join Lief and hunt this Sazar down?”
“No, that doesn’t sound right to me, either,” Ryson said with a shake of his head.
“Lief is going too far, taking too much responsibility for what’s going on and doing far
more than is necessary. He’s out on some kind of mission thinking he should kill every
dark creature in the land. What Lief is doing didn’t start with Sazar and it’s not going to
end with Sazar. He’s on some kind of crusade. I’m not ready to go that far, but then again
something should be done about that serp.”
“Well, what do you think should be done exactly?” Linda asked.
“Like I said, he should be punished for what he did in Pinesway. He can’t be allowed
to get away with that.”
“You’re setting yourself in a circle you know,” Linda pointed out. “You think Sazar
has to be punished, but in order to punish him you would have to capture him. Lief is
going out to capture him, but you’re not sure if that’s a good idea.”
“He’s not going out to capture him. He’s going out to kill him.”
“Well if you think Sazar is captured, do you think he should be executed?”
Ryson didn’t answer.
“Don’t go silent on me again. You need to get this out. What do you think should be
done with Sazar?”
“I guess if I had my way he’d be taken to the dwarf town of Dunop and thrown in the
dungeon that I was in under the palace. He looted their city and that’s where he should
pay for his crimes. Let him rot there until he dies.”
“In my mind, that’s the same as executing him. It’s just a longer duration. The serp
would probably prefer being killed.”
“Well, I wouldn’t want to be the one that had to swing an axe down on his neck and so
I wouldn’t ask anyone else to do it, the dungeon sounds like a good alternative.”
It was now Linda’s turn to look out in the distance to the southwest, in the direction
she thought the Lacobian desert to be.
“So I guess the problem is that Sazar is out there and not here in chains.”
“That’s certainly part of the problem,” Ryson agreed, “and now he’s tied in with
Tabris who is powerful enough not only to protect him but to make him more of a threat.
I’m still not sure if Lief is right in trying to hunt Sazar down on his own, but if he does
somehow put an arrow in the serp, I don’t think I’ll lose any sleep over it.”
Linda thought for a moment on what Ryson said and then questioned him on one part
of it. “You said that you aren’t sure if Lief is right in trying to hunt Sazar down on his
own. You also said that if someone here in town committed the same crimes that Sy
would send a party of men out to capture him. What’s the difference?”
“I guess because Sy is captain of the guard and it’s his responsibility to protect the
town.”
“Lief is an elf,” Linda countered. “Maybe his job is to protect all of the land or at least
protect Dark Spruce. Much of what Sazar has done has been in or near the forest. Why
doesn’t that give him the right to exact justice?”
“I’m not sure that it doesn’t,” Ryson admitted. “Like I said, I don’t know what to think
of this thing. In a lot of ways, I think Lief is right. At the same time, I don’t like what I
think is motivating him, but I’m not sure if I should try to look at it that way. If you look
at just the basics of this mess, Lief is actually justified. I’m not even sure it would be
wrong for any one of us in this town to go hunt the serp down. We have the right to
defend ourselves. Sazar brought this on himself.”
Ryson then turned and nodded back to the town. “The truth of it is I wish Enin would
do something about it. That’s another reason I went to talk to Holli. I wanted to make
sure Enin knew about what Lief was up to. I thought maybe it might get him thinking like
I’m thinking. If it did, he could stop this whole thing in an instant, but he just keeps on
talking about balance and not interfering in people’s choices. It’s frustrating.”
Linda considered that point for a moment and wondered how she would have felt if
Enin turned down her request to warn Tabris not to hurt Ryson.
“I see what you’re saying,” Linda offered. “We have this wizard here that’s like a god.
When he helps us, we know we’re blessed. When he doesn’t, we wonder why he won’t.”
“Especially when we’re dealing with magic,” Ryson continued. “If it was just Sazar
out there, I think I would have wished Lief luck and figured that would be all we’d have
to worry about the serp. The fact that Tabris is now involved changes everything. We
don’t know what she’s done, if she’s done anything at all that warrants basically calling
an assassin out on her. I’m not sure if Lief can actually kill her, but that’s his basic
intention.”
“If she joined with Sazar, then she’s an accomplice to whatever he does.”
“At this point, we don’t know what they’re up to, and we don’t know why she joined
Sazar in the first place.”
“You told me that it was Enin’s belief that she had now turned evil.”
“Exactly, and I have no reason to doubt him. He knows things that will happen before
they actually do, I can tell that much. He won’t say it, but I can see it. I don’t know if he
reads the future, has some kind of visions, or what, but I definitely know that he has some
idea of how things are going to play out.”
Linda remembered how certain Enin was that Tabris would not be able to harm
Ryson. She did not feel that his guarantees were enough at that time. Listening to Ryson
talk about the wizard’s power made her think that maybe his assurances should have
relieved her more than they did. Suddenly, she started feeling much more secure about
the future.
“Maybe that’s how you should look at it,” Linda said with renewed optimism. “You
admit that Enin is powerful and has abilities we really can’t understand. Don’t you think
that if his assistance was truly necessary, he would give it freely?”
“But it is needed.”
“Is it? How do we know?”
“We don’t know, but there’s certainly enough going on to make us realize we might
need some help.”
“Need help or want help?” Linda asked. “There’s a big difference. Just because we
want something or ask for something, doesn’t necessarily mean it’s the best thing for us.
Maybe we can’t always have some higher power help us out. Maybe sometimes we have
to figure things out on our own. I don’t know if that’s balance, but that might be what
he’s talking about when he goes on about our choices we have to make.”
“So we just go out and do what we can and hope for the best?” Ryson asked.
Linda smiled reassuringly. “Maybe that’s all we can do.”

Lief noticed the strange goblin activity before he even set foot in the Lacobian Desert.
His travels brought him through the heart of Dark Spruce Forest and while he moved
with a mind toward the southwest desert, the activities within the trees could not go
ignored. The existence of goblin packs wandering the forest had become commonplace
now that magic had returned to the land, and detecting the diminutive monsters became
natural practice for all elves that ventured through the trees.
At first, the elf simply tried to avoid the goblins, but their persistent movement was
the first hint that something was not quite right. Goblins were not transient, nomadic
creatures that constantly ventured across the land. If anything, they moved only when
necessary and normally not far from an established source of food and water. During the
dormant season when food remained scarce, many goblins even dropped into a near state
of hibernation.
Lief, however, found the exact opposite behavior in every group of goblins he
encountered. As he ventured further into the heavy trees, he continued to come across
roving bands of the dark creatures that showed anything but normal activity. These small
groups showed no desire to remain still, but moved with purpose and without squabble
over direction. That in itself was almost too much to believe as it was a goblin’s nature to
argue and complain within their ranks, especially if they were doing something against
their instincts.
He realized that while they were moving in small packs and did not congregate into
one horde, they still moved as if they had the same goal in mind. They were all arming
themselves, apparently raiding human outposts and possibly even a dwarf mine. Still,
even as they collected weapons, they did nothing to establish a territory or even a zone of
safety. The latter was the most confusing as the normally suspicious and leery creatures
ignored obvious signs of potential predators. They moved about the forest as if they did
not have to care about potential threats. Even when hook hawks soared above their heads,
the goblins simply continued moving eastward as opposed to shrieking in fear and diving
for cover.
“Odd,” the elf noted to himself. “They move as if they have come together, yet they
remain apart. This is not like goblins at all.”
The elf knew full well that goblins were capable of combining into a massive horde
and moving of like mind and desire. It is at this time these creatures are their most
dangerous and prove that they can not be ignored as some weak insignificant pest that
can be swatted away. Elflore describes past legends and battles that include a sea of
goblins attacking in waves of a purple-gray, pulsating mass that could fill the hillsides
like ants on a drop of sugar. Their sheer numbers of incalculable size could overwhelm
the best defended castles of men or the tallest tree fortresses of elves.
Still, for goblins to reach this level of a threat, they would need to combine. An
underlying need or desire must bring them together into one conjunctive mass. For all the
Lief could see, they remained in their small packs, but acted as if their aims were the
same.
Remaining high in the trees and deep within the cover of pine branches, Lief avoided
being seen by goblins below or flying beasts above.
“Why would they all be moving in the same direction? They could fear something to
the west, but they do not act as if fleeing. They are moving with purpose, not with fear.”
In considering a danger to the west, Lief’s mind returned to his own objective of Sazar
and Tabris. He wished to waste no further time on the likes of goblins when such a true
threat existed out in the Lacobian Desert. He almost dismissed what he witnessed until he
realized the actions of the goblins might indeed be related to his own objective.
“Could the serp be directing them?” the elf wondered aloud. “No serp has the power
to control this many goblins separated by such a distance. But what other explanation is
there? They do not flee from the hook hawks. If anything they ignore them. Even if they
numbered thousands, the arrival of the bird beast would at the very least provoke a
response. If the serp was indeed guiding their actions, as well as the hawk, they would
indeed ignore the bird.”
Lief considered all he knew and all he saw. “No serp alone has the power to do this,
but what of a serp combined with the power of a sorceress? And if Sazar were to gain
such power, what would he do? Would he stay in the Lacobian wasteland where prizes
are few and far between? No, he would not. He would move either west to the coastal
towns or east through the forest and into the plains that hold so many human cities.”
Putting the pieces together in his head like a puzzle that becomes easier to solve at the
end, the elf visualized Sazar creating an army of minions just as he had done before
attacking Pinesway. This time, however, the army would be massive in size and scope.
With the aid of a sorceress’ power, the serp could control thousands upon thousands of
goblins as well as hook hawks and other monsters. From the desert, Sazar would have to
cut through the rocky hills and then Dark Spruce, but eventually he would come to the
open plains and one human town after another where he could finish what he started in
Pinesway. Realizing that the goblins were indeed linked to his own objective, Lief
understood he did not have to go to the Lacobian to find his target.
“These creatures will lead me to Sazar, eventually.”

“Raid the farmhouses and the barns, leave the animals alone, allow the humans to
escape. When they have fled, search all the buildings quickly for weapons and food,”
Sazar commanded the goblin in charge of the raiding parties. He would also send these
orders by thought to each minion surrounding the outlying farms, but as he discovered
the goblins actually responded better to a chain of command, he elevated a certain
number of them to higher ranks and communicated with them directly.
It truly wasn’t necessary for him to speak with his minions to get his orders across.
His powers of control enhanced by Tabris’ magic allowed him to communicate his
directives completely through mental links. Allowing a few goblins access to his
presence and speaking to them directly, however, elevated these creatures to a higher
status. It was a status all the goblins desired, and they would compete with each other to
gain the serp’s favor in order to move up the ranks. While the serp found repeating his
orders verbally somewhat tiresome, he realized the effort actually enhanced the goblins’
willingness to follow his directives exactly. With so many dark creatures under his
control, Sazar quickly learned how to manipulate and influence them with the greatest
degree of efficiency.
For the most part, the goblins showed a great desire to belong to his horde, and as his
army grew, it actually took less exertion to place them under his command. Many of the
diminutive creatures actually began seeking him out, as if they could sense the growing
power of the goblin horde now under his direction. They bickered and argued constantly.
They fought and backstabbed for any advantage they could obtain to move up the ranks,
and this proved to be an annoyance as he began to lose goblin soldiers to their own
infighting. Still, Sazar found that establishing a dominant order within the goblin ranks
increased the zeal and willingness of each individual goblin to work toward promotion.
This more than made up for the moments of turmoil.
“Remember,” Sazar continued, “force them out of their dwellings or lure them out, but
do not kill them in their homes. Let them see you, let them panic, and let them run. Make
sure the fleeing humans head toward the city, not out toward the wilderness. If they head
for the trees or toward the grassy hills, redirect them to the roads heading back to the city.
If they continue to seek refuge elsewhere, then you may kill them. Some of them must
reach the city guard posts alive.”
Sazar’s long thin tongue quickly darted out of the side of his mouth as he looked
toward the east from a small window. He sat in a large chair in front of a desk that had
one leg smaller than the others. It wobbled slightly when he leaned upon it. The building
he now used as shelter from the night and the coming snow storm was one of three
structures that comprised a small outpost to the northwest of Connel’s outlying farms.
The bodies of the humans that used to maintain this outpost lay stacked in a haphazard
pile in back of a small shed like structure. The dead humans previously served as clerks
monitoring goods shipped from Connel to the northern passage routes that led through
the Colad Mountains and into the northwest valley regions. Their journals and papers
now fed the fire which kept Sazar warm.
“I will let each raiding party commander know when to begin their individual
assaults,” the serp informed his raiding commander. “I want you to remind them of the
importance of waiting for that order.”
The serp then gazed deeper into the eyes of the goblin commander. Sazar’s eyes
seemed to swirl as if the dark oblong pupils floated in unsteady waters. His voice
hummed with a near musical tone as he detailed the first part of his plan to the raid
commander.
“The raids will begin in three farms due south of Connel’s main entrance. The farmers
will not want to fight goblins alone in the dark. They will also not want to risk losing
their supplies this early in the dormant season. Most will run for the nearest guard post.
The human sentries will alert their superiors and they will almost definitely respond with
a forward patrol on horseback to drive off what they will view as an ordinary raid of
simple goblins looking for food. The mounted patrol will investigate and they must be
allowed to see the goblins about the farm houses, thus your raiders will not hide at the
sound of the incoming horses. They must be seen, and then they must flee, but they are
not to respond in any other way.”
Glaring at the goblin commander and pressing even deeper into the mind of the
diminutive monster, Sazar made sure the goblin understood his strategy. “More raids will
begin just west of those first three farms as well as further south once the first human
patrol has been sighted. The escaping farmers of these additional raids will come across
the horseback patrol and announce the new activity. Unsure if these are the same raiders
that scattered or another raiding party, the patrol will call for reinforcements. That is why
the raids must be staggered.”
Once certain that the goblin commander understood Sazar’s intentions without
question, the serp announced the rest of his plan. “At the point, the humans will
undoubtedly send reinforcements to the south. When this detachment reaches the outlying
farm lands, the primary raid will occur at all the farms to Connel’s east. Again, let the
farmers escape to the city, let them reach the guard posts. When their militia learns of this
new larger attack, they will believe we bypassed the city in order to gain access to the
dormant season food stocks. Upset that goblins have moved well past the city limits and
to the more important farmlands of the eastern plains, the humans will most assuredly
dispatch the majority of their forces. It is at this time their forces will be out in the open
and most vulnerable to attack. The main body of my army that has already surrounded
Connel will fall upon them with force. When they are decimated, I will then call on the
shags and bloat spiders. You will also begin to hear the calls of the razor crows and hook
hawks. That will conclude all raiding activity on the outlying farms and you are to
withdraw and redeploy your forces to cover the main road that extends east out of
Connel.”
The goblin did not speak. It simply nodded and waited to be dismissed. Sazar waved
his scaly hand and the raiding commander scurried out the door.
A handful of goblins remained in the shabby office with Sazar as he began to
telepathically communicate his orders to his army as a whole. These goblins within the
outpost office earned the right to extricate themselves from the mass that made up the
horde and stand by Sazar’s side. They normally fulfilled meager tasks to keep the serp
happy. For the most part, they served as nothing more than messengers and gophers, and
they would do anything to retain that position and avoid returning to the horde as simple
foot soldiers. One of these goblins was Chal, a goblin that had no real duty other than to
serve as Sazar’s listening board.
Not the smartest, the most cunning, the strongest, or even the most kowtowing goblin,
Chal gained Sazar’s favor by being the most able to listen. His attention span far
exceeded the normal goblin and it allowed him to remain focused on a conversation with
the serp even as Sazar was forced to take long pauses to communicate with his army of
minions. With other goblins, Sazar could never start a conversation, take a pause of more
than a few moments, and return without having to start all over again. Chal for some
reason could actually keep a thought in his balloon like head for more than a wink of the
eye, a trait that was most unusual for goblins and immediately elevated him to a high
status.
“Chal,” Sazar called out. “I’m interested in your opinions on this action. This is my
first true conquest and as it begins, I wish to analyze it further. To this point, I have been
quite successful in keeping this huge number of goblins undetected. That in itself has
been a monumental task. The approaching storm has undoubtedly assisted in this matter.
Traveling in Dark Spruce gave us natural cover. Getting across the hills and farmlands
was another matter. In order to get this close to the city without being seen, we have had
to use much of the night already. We do not have long now before the sun rises. When it
does, we will obviously be discovered. Still, I have the city surrounded and they don’t
even know it yet. I have numerous raiding parties ready to attack, thus we are now
committed. Still, it almost seems too easy, but as there is no turning back, I am
wondering if I might be overlooking something. What would you do at this moment?”
Chal responded as he often did, simply and without much thought. “There are enough
goblins at your command to simply take the city and kill everyone. That is what I would
do.”
Sazar expected this over simplistic response, but in truth, he did not really want Chal’s
advice. He simply used Chal as a way to talk to himself. By explaining to Chal the basic
principles of his approach, Sazar often found potential flaws that might be so obvious that
they were earlier overlooked.
“So you feel I have wasted too much time and placed too much effort in keeping my
forces concealed. I have enough raw power to simply march into Connel and destroy the
city. That is probably true, but I would lose more goblins that way.”
“They can be replaced.”
“It is good to see that you have such love for you fellow goblins. Still, you mustn’t be
short sighted. Yes, I can find replacements, but I want this army to grow not to shrink or
to remain stagnate. I plan to control far more than this city. The land occupied by the
humans extends far to the east, very far indeed, most likely beyond your wildest
imagination. There are countless towns and cities that extend through the farmlands and
grasslands. Uton is only a small region of an even larger expanse. There is another ocean
to the east and cities of massive size on its coast. One day, I may wish to take these cities
as well. To do that, I must grow in power, not lose power out of impatience.”
Sazar clicked his long sharp nails on the desktop. The desk wobbled momentarily and
Sazar sighed as he sat back in his chair away from the unsteady table.
“Also, by concealing my forces the humans were never alerted and given a chance to
escape. It is not enough to simply take an empty city. That was my objective when I
attacked that pathetic town of Pinesway. I will no longer think so small.
“The second mistake you make is in wanting to kill all the human inhabitants. That is
just plain foolishness. I have told you of my bargain with Tabris. I am bound to honor
that bargain and fully intend on doing so. If I kill everyone in the city, what will that
leave me to send to Tabris? Goblins? I doubt that would make her happy, to say nothing
of my goblin army. No, it would not do to simply march in and kill them all. I must
control them. To do that, I must show them that I am more than a marauding army. The
battle must not only be won, it must be won in such a way that they understand I am not
to be underestimated.
“I also have to think about supplying my forces,” Sazar continued. “I am no longer
interested in simply raiding and stealing what I can get my hands on. I will conquer this
city and I will hold it. Once I am in control, I will need food for my forces as well as
metals to make new weapons. I certainly can not depend on the goblins or any other of
my minions to farm or to mine. I will need the humans to do that. I will offer them life in
exchange for their servitude. In order for that bargain to work, they must remain alive
after I take the city.”
Sazar nodded his head with a degree of satisfaction. “No, I believe the initial designs
of my plan are sound. I don’t want the inhabitants of Connel to escape and I don’t want
them all killed. I simply need to make sure their ability to fight is extinguished. I will do
that by coaxing a large portion of their forces out into the open and destroying them. The
ordinary inhabitants of the city will then be more willing to accept their fate.”
Chal shrugged. “Goblins don’t like the open land. When the sun comes up, we will
look for cover from the light.”
“The storm clouds will keep it fairly dark for a while,” Sazar hummed. “I believe it
will also snow for some time. The sun will not be too much of a problem.”
“We do not like snow, either.”
“Goblins don’t like much of anything,” Sazar responded with a weary sigh. “But I
must say I should consider that. I can not allow the battle to drag on for long. A heavy
snow might slow my army’s forward movement into the city. If the humans can regroup
with archers, it might allow them to cause heavy casualties, not enough to change the
ultimate outcome, but as I said, I wish to minimize my losses. It is best if I begin the first
raids as soon as possible.”

“Humans always cut down the trees,” Lief grumbled to himself with disgust.
Watching from a small grove of trees that long ago used to be part of sprawling Dark
Spruce Forest but was now nothing more than an isolated patch, Lief’s sharp elf eyes
could peer though the distance as well as the darkness to make out the movements of
several goblin packs. He stayed within the safety of the trees as razor crows continued to
fly overhead. The cold air became still as the night grew darker. The elf could smell the
snow in the air, waiting to fall and cover the tracks of the moving horde.
The goblin packs had moved past the trees just as night fell and their numbers had
swelled to alarming proportions. They continued their eastward movements and it
became all too clear to the elf that Connel must be their ultimate destination. Scurrying
over hills, darting down dark dirt roads, and skulking through dormant farm fields, the
goblins moved in an orderly fashion with that one apparent destination in mind. The
number of goblins in each pack increased ten fold, and the number of these packs grew at
the same staggering rate. They did not yet combine into one massive throng, but as they
closed upon Connel, they did less to spread their numbers across the vast land. With their
raids on outposts and mines now obviously complete, they now moved with a bigger goal
in mind.
During his previous travels through Dark Spruce, Lief had kept a casual eye on the
trail of the marching monsters. He stayed alert, high in the trees, and was spotted on
numerous occasions, both by goblins below and flying beasts above. When spotted, he
remained calm as he followed a pack for a short distance and then eventually turned and
moved off to find another band. He acted like nothing more than an elf guard keeping
tabs on a goblin threat invading the lands too near an elf camp. Such encounters had to be
common to these creatures as they traveled by so many other elf camps. As long as his
sightings remained consistent and revealed nothing beyond causal forest reconnaissance,
he believed he would be disregarded by the dark creatures, and so far, he was.
With the goblins now out of the forest, however, Lief’s options dwindled. An elf spied
out in the open farmlands would now be looked upon with much greater suspicion. He
could not yet afford to bring that kind of attention upon himself. As of yet, he was unable
to get a fix on the serp that he knew was behind all of this activity. He believed Sazar was
close, but the outlying farms of Connel spread over great distances. There was little else
he could do but wait.
“This is as close as I can get… for now.”

The new mayor of Connel was very tired, but seldom was able to sleep. When a strong
knock came on her bedroom door, she was already awake considering more rebuilding
plans for the next few days.
“Give me a moment,” Helen Flisher responded. She rose from her bed and pulled on
her clothes. She knew she would not sleep any further this night, so there was no need to
pretend she would return to bed. When she opened her door, she found her assistant
waiting for her with a look that revealed more fear than concern.
“What’s wrong?” Helen asked firmly.
“Guard Captain Tevor is here to see you. He says it’s urgent.”
“Where is he?”
“At the door, he wouldn’t come in.”
Mayor Flisher moved past her assistant and toward the front of the house. The door
was open and a cold wind greeted her. She grabbed a coat that hung crumpled over a
chair, threw it over her shoulders, and stepped outside.
A heavyset man with a sour face only glanced at her and then returned his gaze toward
the south of the city. “Sorry to disturb you, mayor, but I’m following your orders.” The
career soldier’s voice was thick as if the words from his mouth weighed more than those
from other men. “We have reports that goblins are raiding farms to the south. More than
one farm family has made the report so I believe the claims are legitimate. I have no
scouts at that position at this time so I can not verify beyond these reports. Based on what
I have heard, I believe three farms have been attacked. I have no reports of casualties at
this time. These farms are beyond the city limits, so I have executed your standing orders
for all goblin raids outside the city. I have placed all interior guard posts on alert, recalled
all outer patrols and placed them at watch within the city’s main quadrants, dispatched
additional watch to the roofs of our tallest structures, and placed the cavalry at the ready.”
His initial report complete, Captain Tevor turned and awaited the mayor’s response.
Helen Tevor stepped carefully down the front steps of her house and looked to the
south and then up at the sky. She pulled her coat more tightly around her as she inhaled
heavily the cold air.
“It’s going to snow,” she remarked.
“Probably,” the soldier agreed.
The mayor played out the possibilities in her mind. “Goblins are small, they probably
don’t like the snow. They would move like children, struggling through it if it got too
deep. They’re probably hungry and worried the snow might prevent them from
scavenging food in the forest. If I were them, I might try a quick strike on a farm to get
what food I could.”
“I could send out a patrol on horseback, find out what they’re up to and clear them
out,” the captain offered.
The mayor looked up at the sky again and shook her head. “No, it’s still dark and a
storm can be unpredictable. Dawn will be here soon, let’s wait for more light. If the
farmers protest, let them know they will be compensated for their losses. The dwarves
never hit the farms so we have more food then we have people now. We can afford to
lose a few barrels of grain to a handful of goblins, but I don’t want to lose any more
soldiers to goblin crossbows. It’s just not worth the risk.”
The captain found the concern for his soldiers quite refreshing and nodded in
acceptance. “Will you be remaining here in case I have to send you updated reports?”
“No, I’m going to head over to town hall—well the temporary town hall—to my
office. I’m not going to get anymore sleep tonight, so I might as well make good use of
the time.”
“Very well. I will keep you updated.”
“Thanks.”

Sazar sat quietly with his mind focused on the sensations he received from the half
dozen rock beetles that were now under the town. Through them, he could feel the
movement of the human troops, sense their alarm, but none of it matched what he
expected.
“The farmers reached several guard posts within the city limits quite a while ago,” the
serp said more to himself than to Chal, but he wanted the goblin to listen as well.
“They’ve had plenty of time to rouse their forward scouts. Indeed they have already
recalled their outer patrols and have mounted several soldiers on horseback. These
soldiers are not moving out. Why not?”
“They are afraid,” Chal said.
“No, they are moving with great certainty and purpose, not panic, but they are staying
much too cautious. Could they know I already have them surrounded? No, that doesn’t
make sense, either. Everything I feel indicates they are simply waiting, not truly
preparing for a battle. It’s almost as if we don’t exist to them, as if the small raids never
took place.”
“Maybe they don’t care about these farmers,” Chal offered, and at that, Sazar turned a
head toward the goblin.
“They do not care? Hmmmmmm. Humans tend to be an excitable lot. When they feel
they are threatened they either run or attack. A few of the more intelligent ones show a bit
more caution, but in the end they also would meet a raid with some type of action. But
what if they didn’t care? They might indeed ignore the claims of a few farmers and
simply do enough to appear as if they are prepared to meet any additional threats. Very
good, Chal. Let us give them additional threats.”
Sazar began sending new orders by mental command, first to his raiding commander
and then to the individual pack leaders. He began narrating his new plans as he continued
linking with the minds of the goblins in the fields. He spoke out loud to Chal as he
completed most of his commands.
“Since there is no patrol to respond to the first raid, it is a waste of time to try and
confuse them with another smaller raid in the same area. I’m calling for an immediate
attack by all goblin raiding parties in the fields to the east of Connel. I am also directing
them to force the humans to flee to the city by whatever means necessary. Let us see if
the humans remain so cautious when many of the farmers to the east reach their guard
posts with warnings of a larger raid. I think then they will care, they will care a great
deal.

Even in the dark and over great distances, Lief could see the turmoil in the farmlands.
The first raid to the south of Connel was smaller in scope. When he watched the goblins
allow the farmers to flee toward the city, he realized he had a chance to enter Connel. He
would be seen, but probably not noticed if he appeared as a fleeing farmer as opposed to
an elf.
Pulling his cloak out about him to cover the bow and quiver of arrows on his back,
Lief looked over his own appearance to see what he might do to be more convincing.
Making small tears in the lower portions of his shirt and pants, his clothes fit more
loosely making him appear wider, especially in the dark. Satisfied, he dropped out of the
sparse area of trees, and upon the ground. He began to trot toward Connel, not with the
speed and grace of an elf, but with the hurried and frantic gait of a fearful human. He kept
crouched over and a hood pulled down well over his head. He remained on the main road
as this was an area the goblins remained watchful over but had dared not encroach.
As he passed over several hills and past many of the southern farms, he peered to the
east. Well past the city limits, the outlying farms in this region suddenly came alive with
panic. The elf could see small fires being lit across the lands, and he spied the shadows of
both goblins and humans running frantically about. Many of the humans took to the roads
heading toward Connel and it appeared again as if the goblins were allowing them to
make it safely to the city, though Lief could not imagine why.
The raids to the east grew in scope and intensity. The shouts became clearer. The fear
grew more apparent in the human screams just as the hate intensified in the goblin
shrieks. It appeared as if hundreds of farm families had been rousted from their beds and
were now fleeing for the protection of Connel.
Lief quickly came to the area that he knew presented the greatest challenge. From his
previous position, he knew that Sazar had surrounded Connel with his multitude of
goblins. This ring, however, was not complete. In order to hide his horde, Sazar utilized
the surrounding farmlands as cover and kept the monsters off the main roads and low in
the fields. This presented several breaks in the goblin lines including one on the road that
the elf now traveled.
The goblin position was also fluid and it moved with cunning to avoid previous
human patrols. Lief did not know how it that was possible, but the goblins appeared to
gain advanced warning to patrols, almost as if somehow they could sense the soldiers’
movement the moment they left the confines of the city. Retreating and parting to allow
humans to pass, the goblins showed much more diligence in avoiding the guards than on
seizing or attacking them.
As Lief approached the area he knew to contain the greatest concentration of goblins,
he realized if he were to be stopped, it would be now. Still, he hoped he could avoid an
encounter simply by appearing to be nothing more than a fearful human running toward
the safety of Connel.
“If they let the farmers make it to the city, perhaps they will do so with me,” Lief said
quietly trying to convince himself he was not running toward his own death.
He moved with a labored unsteadiness as he remained crouched over. He exhaled
heavily almost to the point of wheezing, and he even threw in a few groans of despair as
he looked over his shoulder appearing to fear what might be behind him. Every fiber of
his being told him to move faster, to utilize his swift elf abilities to avoid the danger that
he knew was all about him. To do so, however, would surely mean his death, and thus he
fought down his own instincts. He rambled onward, even falling to his knees on the hard
road. He scrambled up with all the contrived imbalance he could muster as he continued
onward toward the lights of Connel.
Throughout his ungraceful run, he expected to hear the sizzling whistle of a crossbow
bolt whizzing through the air. He waited for the burning sting of penetration into his
back. The pain never arrived and he quickly neared the first outer buildings of Connel.
As much as he did not wish to be seen by the goblins, neither did he wish to confront
the humans on guard. Several remained on watch peering out into the darkness.
Attempting one last charade, Lief stumbled to the ground rolled over into the ditch and
quickly slid on his belly away from the main road and into matted grass.
No longer needing to fool the goblins, he moved with his elf grace. Rolling silently
through light underbrush he made his way to toward a dark building just off to his left.
He climbed up a post as if climbing an oak tree. Avoiding the notice of the guard, he
rolled up on to the roof and surveyed the area around him.

Running out of the old town library that now served as the town hall and the office of
the Mayor, Helen Flisher reached the outside air just as Captain Tevor began leaping up
the stone steps.
“I was just coming for you,” he said with an out-of-breath huff. “More trouble.”
“I hear. What’s going on that we can be sure of?”
“More goblin raids, this time to the east.”
“The east?! They’ve bypassed the city?” Mayor Flisher questioned in surprise.
“Unless they came from somewhere else other than Dark Spruce, it looks like it.”
“I didn’t think goblins liked the open lands.”
“I didn’t either, but we really don’t know too much about them.”
The mayor frowned. “Never mind, we’ll deal with that later. It sounds bad out there,
what kind of goblin numbers are we looking at.”
“Too dark to get a good look,” Tevor admitted, “but it’s clear they’re hitting just about
every farm that’s within walking distance on our eastern side. In order to do that, they
would need at least two hundred maybe more.”
“Casualties?”
“No reports of any as of yet. Every farm family that has made it to the city has said
that the goblins didn’t harm them or their family members and they didn’t see any dead
on the road into the city.”
“They’re letting them escape?”
“Seems that way. I have the full cavalry waiting at the eastern border of the city for a
full charge to repel. Even if there’s four hundred out there, we can send them into retreat
and clear the area.”
The mayor considered what she was told and listened to the clamor in the distance.
She wanted to give the order, but a great doubt weighed upon her mind. She hesitated and
revealed her concerns. “Something about this isn’t right. They hit us to the south and now
they hit us to the east with greater numbers. We didn’t respond to their first attack. If they
just want food, why not use their numbers to sack everything they could from the
southern farms? Why move up to the east? If they are from Dark Spruce, they put the city
between them and their escape. If not, why did they break up their forces to hit the south
first?”
“Two possibilities that I can think of, the first is that the two attacks are not related.
Maybe these are two different goblin packs that have nothing to do with each other, but
because of the storm, they both got the same idea. They just attacked from different
points.”
“Do you believe that?”
“Not for an instant,” Tevor admitted, “but it is possible.”
“The second possibility?”
“The second is that they know the eastern farms are larger. When we didn’t respond to
their first attack, they got brave and went for the bigger prize.”
Mayor Flisher shook her head. “If they know that the eastern farms are larger they
should also know that it’s the dormant season and we moved most of the food from those
farms into the city.”
“We also kept a good deal out in the farms in case the dwarves attacked again so we
wouldn’t lose all our supplies.”
“True, so you think they just want our reserves?” the mayor asked.
“They’re goblins, they don’t farm themselves. Why not?”
“I don’t know. Something still doesn’t feel right about this.”
At that very moment, the first few snow flakes began to drift out of the night sky.
“It’s starting to snow,” the mayor said.
“Aye, what’s your order on the cavalry?”
“Hold them,” Mayor Flisher said quickly, but then she altered her position slightly.
“Actually, no. Have them ride out and assist the escaping farmers, but they are not to
engage the goblins—just a rescue mission, nothing else. It’s going to be light soon
enough and it’s already starting to snow. We have enough food in the city that we can
afford to lose those reserves, but I don’t think we will. They don’t have enough time to
take everything. Pretty soon it’s going to be light out here and the snow is going to pile
up and slow them down. If the goblins are still out there when it gets lighter, we’ll see
them and know what we’re really up against. If they’re loading up with supplies and
trying to run back to the forest, we can send out your forces then. What do you think?”
“I admit I don’t like running from a fight…”
“Well, we’re not really running. We’re just waiting for the right time.”
Tevor smiled lightly. “Aye, I can wait and I’d like to see just what we’re up against as
well.”

Frowning and shaking his head, Sazar’s normal flowing and hypnotic voice dropped
to a grumble. “Why are they not counterattacking? They are allowing us to move
unimpeded. Their cavalry is doing nothing more than gathering up some of the farmers.”
Throwing a fist down on the uneven table, Sazar threw himself out of his chair and
stormed to the door. “I need to have better view of what is going on.”
He threw open the door and stepped out into the cold night air. Ignoring the snow
flakes falling on his head, he sent a mental command to a hook hawk perched in a tree far
off in the distance.
Lowering its head slightly, the beast turned about on a thick branch, spread its uneven
wings and leapt into the air. With but a few beats of its thick wings, the monster gained
altitude higher then the trees. It began to shift and swerve in the air as it headed in a
jagged path toward the city of Connel. As the flying beast came close enough to view the
full breadth of the city, the images it gained in its mind traveled through magical waves
back to the serp.
“Much of the city is in ruins!” Sazar noted. “I knew the dwarves of Dunop attacked,
but I had no idea that inflicted so much damage. The outer ring is in fair shape, but the
inner city has been crushed. Over half of the buildings are near demolished. The dwarves
must have struck from the city center. The human forces on patrol are few and far
between. No wonder my rock beetles felt so little movement above them. I wonder how
many humans are even left in the city. This changes things drastically.”

Fires from torches lit up the darkness all around Connel. Even as the snow continued
to fall, fear of what now surrounded the city replaced any worries about a simple dormant
season storm. The goblins also set several of the farmhouses ablaze, and the flames licked
the darkness of the waning night. To the east, only a dull, faint glow could be noticed on
the far horizon, but the sight of what stood between that horizon and the city limits
destroyed any ray of hope from the coming dawn.
Sazar himself was on the march toward the northern entrance of the city. With his
small contingent of goblins at his side, he appeared as nothing more than another dark
creature joining the ranks of the monsters that now encircled the city. His horde made no
further attempt to hide their presence, to remain quiet in the darkness, or to avoid the
approach of enemy scouts. Just the opposite, Sazar had ordered his minions to make their
numbers quite clear to the human inhabitants of Connel. He ordered all torches lit, several
farmhouses set ablaze, and every goblin to shriek with murderous delight.
The main body of Sazar’s goblin army closed ranks, blocked all roads surrounding
Connel, and formed one continuous circle around the doomed city. No longer did they
skulk in the shadows or crouch low against the dirt. Not a single clear path existed
through their dark ranks. As the torches and surrounding fires danced with hell-like glee,
the snow that reached the flames sizzled into steam. Newly wet wood gave off a white
smoke as it burned, and the host of goblins appeared as if blessed by some unholy
dragon’s breath.
“Chal,” Sazar called out to the goblin behind him. “Does this meet with your
approval?”
“I like that we are not hiding, but why don’t we attack?” the goblin asked almost
innocently, if that were possible.
“Because I do not believe we will have to,” the serp answered firmly.
Sazar then channeled his commands to the razor crows and hook hawks that remained
near the trees to the west. In mere moments, the dark, thin, almost knife-like crows
circled the goblins overhead. Their V-shaped bodies floated in the glow of the fires
beneath them and their black wings accented the white snow falling out of the shadows
from above. The hook hawks took to flight at a much higher altitude and soared in
swooping patterns over the center of the besieged city. Shrieking upon the serp’s orders,
their calls penetrated every dark alley and every basement shelter. No one in Connel
could ignore the horror they now faced.
“I am ordering the shags and bloat spiders to move as close to the city as possible
without coming in range of any foolish archers. I am also calling for several goblin
raiding packs to advance forward ahead of our main line. We will do the same and appear
as just another pack of goblins. I want to be ready to enter the city when the time is
right.”

“It’s very early, still dark outside,” Enin professed as he looked up at the night sky. As
he looked into the blackness above him, hundreds of snowflakes seemed to materialize
out of nothingness.
“I know,” Ryson said as he waited on the grass in front of Enin’s home which was
now dusted with a thin layer of cotton soft snow, “but it’s snowing and I wanted to take
the dogs out to play and for a run before it gets to deep—or muddy if it warms up and
melts. I didn’t think you’d want a house full of muddy dogs.”
“I don’t mind that much. Actually, I’m very glad you’re here. I would like a moment
to talk to you. It won’t take long and then you can be on your way with the dogs.” The
wizard looked back behind him at the four tail-wagging canines that waited at the front
door. “They won’t mind as long as I don’t keep you too long. Please come into my study.
Holli’s already there and I would like her to hear this as well.”
This piqued the delver’s curiosity and that was all it took to get him inside. He
followed the wizard down the hall and into a large room where Holli waited near a
window. Ryson nodded and the elf returned the greeting.
Enin began immediately, not even waiting to sit down.
“Ryson,” he began, “I want to make sure you understand something. I see in you
someone that cares very much of what happens to others. You involve yourself because I
believe you think it’s your responsibility. I admire that and I wish more people would
have even a slight degree of your willingness to help and contribute.”
The wizard let that statement stand for a moment and then continued what he believed
was an obvious truth. “I’m sure you’re thinking right now that you wish I was more
willing to contribute, and that is what I want you to understand. We have talked often and
at great lengths about things like choices and balance and interference. I never try to read
your thoughts, but I do believe I can sense your reactions now and then. In the past few
days you have helped in Pinesway, and gone out of your way to make sure a friend did
not stray into danger. At the same time, I did nothing to stop Sazar in Pinesway and I
make no attempt to stop Tabris from assisting this monster now. You must wonder why I
do not do more. Am I right?”
Ryson simply nodded.
“You have always gone well beyond what is expected of you,” Enin continued. “You
do so much for so many. When I see what you can accomplish, I am envious and I really
wish I can do more. Unfortunately, I must be very careful.” Enin stopped and sighed.
“There I go again. I am not saying what needs to be said, going in circles, saying the
same thing over and over again. Let me try this again with as much clarity as possible.”
Enin rubbed his hands together and focused his thoughts clearly on what he wanted to
say. “When I talk about balance, I am often referring to the equal weights of all things,
especially good and evil. I have done my best to remain on the proper side of events. I
have strived not to use my power for selfish desires, or out of anger, and especially not
out of arrogance or pride. That being said, I think it’s time you understand there is
another being that exists that does not have that same outlook. I believe he is malevolent
in spirit and would certainly act without the care I have tried to exercise. In many ways,
he is to evil what I hope I am to good. It is a way that the balance can be maintained
throughout the land. I believe this creature exists to keep me in check, to remind me that
if I start to interfere in the choices of humans, elves, dwarves, and so on, it would then
give this creature the opportunity to intervene in his way. Holli has now seen this creature
and I believe she can verify some of what I’m saying.”
Enin turned to the elf and raised an eyebrow. “Well, not clearly seen him, but has been
in his presence. He is not a figment of my imagination, yes?”
“He is real,” the elf responded simply.
“And what do you think of him?”
“I believe he can and would do great harm.”
Enin turned back to the delver.
“You see? I never was making excuses. For whatever reason, there must be balance
and if I break the balance by interfering there will be consequences. In fact, it is actually
very simple. Whatever good I do, it will assuredly be offset immediately somewhere else
by something very bad. There are times I can act, and there are times I don’t believe I
should, otherwise I might invite disastrous results elsewhere. This part is hard to explain,
in truth because I don’t really understand it myself, but if I do something like say
interfere with Sazar and Tabris, it opens the door for this other being to interfere
elsewhere. As long as I am responsible with my actions, it keeps the balance.”
“But there are times you acted before,” Ryson pointed out. “You stopped the dwarves
from destroying Burbon, you destroyed Yave, you warned us about Sazar attacking
Pinesway, and there are countless smaller things you do daily to keep us all safe. Isn’t
that interfering?”
“I don’t think so, then again perhaps it is,” Enin answered in his usual and somewhat
confusing fashion. “It all depends on how you look at it, and it all depends on the results.
With the dwarves, they attacked us, they made a choice. I responded to that choice and to
their actions. I never took away their ability to attack before they chose to do so. It was
also not a struggle between right and wrong or good and evil. The dwarves that attacked
did so because they felt threatened. The people of this town and the elves that fought with
them did so to defend themselves. I ended that battled but I did not intervene in the
struggle between good and evil.”
“That’s where you’re going to lose me,” Ryson proclaimed. “I didn’t see anything
good about the dwarves attack.”
“That’s because you’re not a dwarf,” Enin replied. “Anyway, let us not get sidetracked
from what it is I want to say. I want you to understand that there is evil out there and if I
act out of haste simply to do what I think is right, I believe that evil will be given an
opportunity to gain strength. I can not let that happen. You may not understand that fully,
but perhaps it is enough. What do you think?”
“Well, the fact that you’re telling me there’s something out there as powerful as you
that is evil isn’t going to make me sleep any better,” Ryson admitted, “but at least it gives
me an idea of why you’re as careful as you are.”
“I am very happy to hear that,” Enin reflected with a smile and then thought of a way
to reward the delver. “I also want to share something with you I know that is important to
you. I will give you the answer to a question that has plagued you for some time now.
You have wondered why Dzeb and the other cliff behemoths came to your aid in the
tunnels of Dunop. You even asked him why he came to help and he ignored your
question. You tried to push it aside, but you are a delver and such a task is not truly
possible.
“The truth of the matter is that Dzeb and the other cliff behemoths were vehemently
opposed to intruding in the affairs of other races. It was not their place and they knew it.
They have faith, and in their faith they believe that it is Godson’s will that will determine
the fates of other beings. Even with their grand power, they would not dare to impose
what they thought is right or wrong on other beings. In the end, however, they did
intercede, and the question is why?
“They did so because of you my friend. Not because of your pleas or your arguments,
but simply because they see something in you, something that I see as well. You, whether
your like it or not, are a person of destiny. Do not feel embarrassed by this or even be
surprised by it. It is rare, though it is not completely unheard of to say the least. There
have always been and always will be a handful of individuals in this land that always
seem to be in the thick of important events. Of course there are individuals that only have
one moment of historical significance and then fade in to the background. Then again,
there are others that make important contributions over and over again, and they never
tend to fade away. They keep reappearing. Some say that they do so because they insist
on thrusting themselves into important events even when they do not belong. They live
for fame and power. Sadly, this is true for many such people.
“There are others, however, that do not seek such a position, but neither can they
escape it. They are continuously pressed into service whether they like it or not. They are
people of destiny, and you are such a person.
“Remember, the cliff behemoths always remained true to their faith. They entered
Dunop to stop the sand giants, but ultimately it was you that saved the city from the
shadow trees and stopped the war. Thus, the cliff behemoths did not truly intervene in the
actions or choices of other creatures. They simply gave you the opportunity to do what
you were destined to do and nothing else.
“I won’t ask you if you understand and I don’t wish to try and debate the details. The
only thing I want you to know is that the cliff behemoths entered Dunop to give you a
chance to do what you had to do. Whether you failed or succeeded in the challenges you
faced then, or for that matter in the challenges you still must face, that always remains up
to you.”
Enin looked deeply into the delver and though he still sensed a great deal of confusion
in Ryson, he did not wish to explain any further. “Now, do me a favor and take the dogs
out to play, they are getting impatient.”

As if she simply faded in from the darkness and took form where there was none
before, a woman in a long black cloak appeared off to the side of the road where Sazar
and several goblins stood watching and waiting. Her cloak billowed at the bottom and
appeared to have no true end as if she was an extension of the darkness around her. Her
appearance so stunned one goblin that he fired off a crossbow bolt before he knew what
he was shooting at. The woman stepped forward and leaned into the incoming bolt,
allowing it to plunge deep into her shoulder. Without even a gasp of pain, she pulled the
protruding bolt from her flesh and threw it to the ground.
“Hold,” Sazar commanded to the other goblins. He would not step forward, but he
turned slightly to face the woman.
“You are the serp in control of these creatures,” she stated as a simple fact.
“Indeed I am,” Sazar answered as he stared into the eyes of the woman before him. He
did not like what he saw and for the first time since he gained his new powers from
Tabris, he felt a chill whisk through his very bones.
“Do not try to work your will on me, serp. I understand the strength of will as well as
you do, and though my power to control an army would never match yours, your
influence over me dies in my veins.”
“Vampire?” he questioned.
She said nothing, but the dancing shadow in her eyes made the answer clear.
The serp gritted his teeth. “What is it I should call you?”
“You may call me Janindise”
“Very well, Janindise, how did you find me?”
“For me, I can taste the vibrations of your controlling thoughts. The outflow of your
will is like a guide. I had no trouble following it back to its source.”
“Do you guard this city?” Sazar asked somewhat concerned about what the answer
might be.
“I hate this city,” the woman answered. “Do to it what you will.”
“I plan to,” the serp responded simply. “What is it you want?”
“I have extremely little time before the sun rises, thus I shall waste none. There are
two things you must be made aware of. One is that I am bound to attack goblins, shags
and the like in order to satisfy my thirst. Normally, I would travel into the hills or the
forest to hunt what I need. Now that you bring so many here to me, I find it absurd to
waste time hunting them down in the wild. If it is any solace to you, I will not kill what I
feed upon, thus you will not lose any of your followers. I tell you this out of a courtesy.”
“I appreciate your advanced warning,” Sazar noted. “What confuses me, however, is
why can’t you attack the humans of this town?”
“I will not discuss that.”
Her tone made it very clear that pressing her would be a waste of time and Sazar did
not wish to make an enemy of this woman, certainly not at this point in time.
“Very well. You did say there were two things you wished to advise me of, what is the
second?”
“I have a friend that dwells in this city,” the vampire explained. “I plan to return to
him now. I will not let you hurt him, thus I suggest you advise your goblins, your shags,
your hook hawks, and whatever other monsters you plan to unleash on these other
mortals, to leave us be if they happen to stumble upon us.”
“Does your friend have a name?”
“Edward Consprite. I have already informed him of your arrival here and of the horde
this city faces. He believes he might be of some assistance to you. He has very in-depth
knowledge of this place and its inhabitants. It seems he used to lead them once. He has
been replaced and now also has nothing but contempt for this city as well. I can not
imagine how he might be of help to a serp that wishes to plunder a city, but he has
surprised me on many occasions and so he might surprise you as well. Eventually, he will
come to you on his own. Whether you listen to him or not, that is your business. If you
kill him, then it will become my business.”
“It is not my intention to make anything your business. I will leave you and your
friend be, and I will listen to this human if he does seek me out. I do, however, have a
question. If both you and this Consprite hate this city, why do you stay here?”
“He has no where else to go and I have come to enjoy his company.”
“I see,” Sazar responded simply.
“The sun is rising and I have only moments left. Remember my warning, do not harm
Consprite.”
She took one step back and simply faded into the swirling snow and waning darkness.

“We have to surrender,” the mayor stated with a tone of desperation.
“Surrender? To Goblins?” Captain Tevor found this solution to be no solution at all.
“We have no choice,” Mayer Flisher responded while casting a frantic look out to the
goblin horde that surrounded the city. “What can we do against this? We can’t run; they
have us surrounded. We can’t hold them off; we have no walls, they would be on us in
moments.”
“We can fight,” Tevor offered stubbornly.
The mayor pointed out to the throng of goblins. “Against that?”
“The cavalry is ready and my infantry is entrenched. We’ve been training the civilians
in case of another attack by the dwarves, we might as well call them in now. It may be
enough.”
“It’ll be enough to start a panic and make things a hundred times worse.”
“With all due respect, you’re wrong about the panic. Most of the people already know
we’re surrounded. It’s not like the goblins are making themselves hard to notice any
more. We sound out the alarm just as we planned to do under another dwarf attack. Some
people will go to where they’re supposed to go and be ready to fight, some will hide. At
least we’ll know what we’ve got. The sun is starting to rise, so even with the snow, it’s
getting lighter. The snow is in our favor, too. It will slow them down.”
“And with all due respect to you,” the mayor responded, “how much do you think it’s
going to matter if they have to march through ankle deep snow? They’re already on us.
They’ve even moved shags, spiders and small goblin raiding parties almost up to our
doorstep. They’ve got those strange hawks flying over our heads right now and those
crows waiting right above the goblins. We didn’t train our people to fight against that.
How many experienced soldiers do you really have left? The dwarves decimated our
forces. Look at the number of goblins out there. Do you honestly think we have even the
slightest chance of avoiding annihilation? Tell me with all honesty you think the forces
under your command can possibly find a victory and I’ll pick up a sword and join you,
but it can’t be a suicide charge.”
“Surrendering may be the same as suicide,” Tevor offered with a dark expression.
“They might not take prisoners, and even if they do, we have no idea how they might
treat them. Godson, they might eat us, we just don’t know what they will do. Look, I
appreciate what you’re thinking. You’ve already saved most of my men. I would have
sent out the cavalry when they started raiding the farms. They would have all been
slaughtered and I probably would have marched out there to die with them, but if it’s a
choice between fighting and surrendering, I think all of them would rather fight.”
“Do you think there is any kind of chance we can stop them if they attacked?” the
mayor asked flatly.
“There’s always a chance,” Tevor stated stubbornly.
“Yes, there’s always a chance for a miracle,” the mayor allowed, “but there also has to
be time for realism. This time I’m not going to ask you if there’s a chance, I want you to
be honest with me, as honest as you can be to your soldiers when their life is on the line.
What do you believe will happen if the goblins move forward?”
Tevor bowed his head and looked at the snow covered ground. “I will order the
cavalry to charge their weakest point which I believe is to the southwest. I believe if they
concentrate their charge, they can break through the goblin line, though they will suffer a
fair amount of casualties. I will also order them that once they break through to harass the
enemy flank to the best of their ability, but if they come under heavy crossbow fire,
which they will, I will tell them to retreat south then turn due east and head to the plains.
Hopefully they can hook up with forces at Fort Nebran, and warn them of what went on
here.”
“What about the rest of us here in the city?”
“I will order the infantry to remain entrenched and fight to the death, which I believe
they will. That will hopefully cut deep into their numbers. At least they would if it were
just goblins. So many shags out their have me worried. Those monsters can plow through
our trenches with ease. That’s probably why they’re up front. I will have my best archers
try to pick off the shags and that might help.”
“And if the hawks or the crows interfere with the archers?” Flisher asked.
“Let’s hope they don’t. In the end, even if we do cut into their numbers, there are still
too many goblins to defeat. They will eventually overrun us and move into the city
streets. If we get some luck with the shags and if the infantry can kill as many goblins as I
hope they can, they might not want to venture further into the city where we can have the
civilians armed and ready.”
“And what would happen if they didn’t stop?”
“They’ll wipe us all out,” Tevor answered solemnly.
The mayor heaved a heavy breath. “Even with all the hope in the world, you just
admitted we can’t fight them off. In fact, you admitted we would be dooming our entire
guard force.”
“As I said, we may be doomed anyway. At least, maybe we can get some of the
cavalry out, and if we inflict enough loses, there may be some small hope that we can
save the interior part of the city.”
“I’m sorry captain but that’s not good enough.” Mayor Helen Flisher made a final
decision quickly. “I want you to pull your infantry back, but you may leave the cavalry
where they are. We will raise a white flag and send out four unarmed riders in each
direction of the compass to stop just before they reach where the shags are positioned.
Ask for volunteers, they might not come back alive. If they are approached, they are to
tell the invaders we surrender, but that we have women and children and we need to
understand their terms. They are to ask for representatives to come to the city’s border. I
will then meet with them so they can deliver their terms directly to me so I can have them
followed out. If they will not let us surrender, we will know then. At that point, you can
order your cavalry to make an attempt to escape to the southwest. The rest of us will all
fall back to the city center and fight together, to the death if that’s what happens.”
Captain Tevor knew there was no point in debating. “I’ll see to it.”

Immediately after Ryson left with the dogs for a romp in the snow, Holli turned to the
wizard with an expectant look.
“You know something, don’t you?” she asked.
Enin looked to the floor with a grim expression.
“Ryson is destined for more challenges,” he said with a hollow ring.
“That’s not what I’m talking about,” Holli quickly responded. “I already know Ryson
has yet another moment that he must face that is probably important to us all. I gathered
that from your discussion with Linda when she asked you to warn Tabris. This doesn’t
have to do with Ryson. Something else is happening that’s weighing on you, something
that is happening right now, something that is very bad. You have the power to stop
whatever it is, but you believe such an act would be a mistake. Am I correct?”
“You are. I have always acknowledged your perception, and it appears to be serving
you well yet again.”
“We’re all going to find out what this is, that’s why you told Ryson. We’re going to
eventually hear about this and you knew he would wonder why you didn’t do anything to
prevent it. Whatever it is, it must be rather large in scope.”
“It is,” Enin acknowledged. “With Tabris’ help, Sazar is about to take Connel.
Holli considered this news carefully. “This does not bode well for anyone in this
region. A city that large in the hands of a serp and a sorceress has treacherous
consequences. All of the elf camps in Dark Spruce will view this as a major shift.
Normally, goblins would keep to the cover of the trees and thus were more of a threat to
my kind then the humans, but not anymore. Connel is a gateway to the plains of the east
and the human farms. There are forts to the east, but the goblins will simply avoid them.
This will be clearly viewed as a start to a goblin-human war. Will you do nothing to
prevent it?”
“I believe there is little I can do.”
“No,” Holli stated clearly and without hesitation. “There is little you are willing to do.
There is a difference.”
“Didn’t you hear what I told Ryson?” Enin shot back. “Anything I do is an open
invitation for Baannat to act in an opposing fashion. If I interfere here, where will he
interfere?”
“Let us leave Baannat for a moment and talk about you. Whether you wish to admit it
or not, Ryson was right. You have acted in the past. You have even possibly interfered,
but perhaps you just don’t realize it. Every time a spell caster comes here seeking
guidance from you and you give it, you have inserted yourself in what may come to pass
in the future.”
“But I don’t actually guide these people,” Enin insisted. “I give them something to
think about and send them on their way. The choices they make are up to them, and thus I
don’t interfere. I also don’t make good magic casters stronger or evil ones weaker. I treat
everyone equal.”
“You made me stronger; considerably stronger in fact. My power as a magic caster
has grown significantly since I have joined you.”
“That is true, and for that we can actually thank Tabris.”
Holli cast a doubtful eye at the wizard. “And why is that?”
“Tabris was neutral, then she turned to evil. That opened the way for me to make you
stronger and yet maintain the balance. And that is exactly what I’m talking about. Tabris’
actions allowed me the opportunity to make you stronger as a force of good just as my
actions might allow Baannat an opportunity to act in a terrible way.”
“You were determined to increase my power before you learned of Tabris’ choice,”
Holli noted. “You made that a stipulation of my being your guard and that occurred
before Tabris joined with Sazar.”
“Yes, I did, but there was a reason for that as well. At that time, I was still slightly
stronger then Baannat and could afford to work with you. If I tipped the balance slightly,
it would not have been enough to affect the total balance because it was already in my
favor. However when Tabris turned, it opened the door very wide. Even though I have
been able to enhance your powers far beyond what I originally planned, Baannat was still
unable to gain strength because evil was strengthened through Tabris’ choice. In fact,
Baannat actually lost strength compared to me. That in itself should illustrate why I must
be careful in what I do.”
“This is all very confusing to me,” Holli admitted. “You’re trying to tell me you can’t
act in some ways because it will allow Baannat to counteract what you do. If you
overreach, you will make Baannat stronger.”
“That is precisely what I mean.”
Holli remained doubtful and made such sentiments clear. “I will have to think on
this.”

Sazar had sent Chal to listen to one of the human messenger. When the serp heard the
offer of surrender, he commanded Chal to change certain provisions. He would not meet
the mayor at the border of the city, but rather several roadways deeper just north of the
city center. In order to guarantee his safety, he would have his shags and spiders move
from their current positions to the very edge of the city limits. That way, if anything
happened to him, his followers would be in position to exact retribution. His hook hawks
would remain overhead, but would stay at high altitudes, and his massive goblin horde
would not move one step closer to the city. The mayor could either accept these changes,
or expect the entire horde to enter the city within moments. Sazar knew the answer before
another human messenger returned with the acceptance of Sazar’s demands.
The serp now stood in front of Mayor Flisher listening to her chatter on about women
and children within the center of the city. The useless sentiments bored Sazar, but he
appeared to be interested in order to carry out the final stages of his plan. He nodded here
and there, raised an eyebrow and did his best to appear considerate.
During the meeting, the sky became much brighter and the sun appeared to fight for
dominance through the cloud filled sky. The snow storm quietly diminished into a small
flurry and though the ground was fully covered, the depth of the snow lacked any true
significance. The light wind that made the earlier snowflakes dance had since died
completely away, and the air was silent and still. Everything appeared peaceful and calm,
covered by a thin blanket of white, everything of course but the dark horde that encircled
the city.
“I would also like to send our cavalry out of the city and past your goblins
unmolested,” the mayor remarked. “I will order them out of the area completely. They
will not attack your followers. Instead they will leave through the south and then turn east
and head out into the plains.”
This was the first thing the woman said that actually sparked an ounce of interest in
the serp. His head nodded back and forth for a moment as he made certain considerations
of his own.
“Granted,” Sazar allowed. “Send word to them immediately. They must leave now
without delay.”
Captain Tevor could not remain silent. “May I have a moment with you mayor before
you agree on this?”
The mayor looked to Sazar for his approval and when the serp nodded to her, she
moved back several steps to confer with the guard captain.
“Why would you send our elite forces out of the city?” he demanded with a tone he
tried to keep respectful. “You are leaving us defenseless.”
“We are already defenseless against these goblins. Look, I’m actually doing this based
on your recommendations. You said if we were going to fight, you would have sent the
cavalry out in an attempt to escape, so I’m just following your plan.”
“That was if we were going to fight,” Tevor corrected, “not surrender. Many of the
men you expect to leave have families here. They will not wish to go.”
“I appreciate that, and for the sake of their families you have to order them to go,”
Mayor Flisher stated in an almost pleading fashion. “We have one chance to get out of
this and that’s to give the serp what he wants and hope he leaves us alone. If he doesn’t,
we are going to need help. If your cavalry can get to Fort Nebran without casualties, they
can warn the forces there of what we are facing. Perhaps they can come to our aide and
the cavalry can return in full force. What other choice do we have?”
Realizing that with dozens of shags and nearly twice as many bloat spiders already at
the city borders, there were no choices left for them and the captain agreed.
“Give the order right away,” the mayor demanded. “I want to get them out before he
changes his mind.”
While the mayor and the Captain Tevor discussed their options, Chal could not
restrain his own curiosity.
“Why would you allow the human forces to leave?” the goblin asked of Sazar.
“Very simple,” Sazar said in a tone that almost hummed with satisfaction. “I wish to
conquer and control this city, not destroy it. This cavalry she speaks of is the most
dangerous contingent of humans I face. If I remove them from the area without violence,
I reduce casualties on both sides. I also diminish their forces without diminishing my
own. Finally, with less of their militia within the confines of the city, there will be less
insurrection among these humans. They will be much more willing to follow my orders.”
The mayor returned to the serp before he could say more.
“I have instructed Captain Tevor to give the order to the cavalry. They are already
mounted so they will be leaving in moments. Please instruct your forces to let them pass
peacefully.”
“I shall do so now.”
The serp did not move. He sent a command to all his forces not to interfere with the
human contingent on horseback. He also sent another command, one to his bloat spiders.
With this complete, he turned his attention back to the human leader of the city that was
assuredly now under his control.
“What else is it you would like to propose?” the serp asked.
“Will you not send a message to your forces regarding our cavalry?” the mayor
demanded with an alarmed expression.
“I have already done so,” Sazar responded as he raised an eyebrow. “Perhaps all of
you here should understand that I do not need to move from this spot to command my
entire army. I do not need to speak to communicate my desires. If you doubt this, then all
you have to do is listen. You will hear no clamor to the south, no screams, no sounds of
battle. Your cavalry is moving right now as we speak out of the city. I see what my forces
see and so I know it is true.”
Both the captain and the mayor eyed the serp with suspicion but then turned an ear to
the south. Indeed, they heard nothing that would indicate any disturbance. They allowed
long moments to pass and still all remained quiet.
“I will ask again,” Sazar interrupted them, “what else would you like to propose?”
The mayor appeared momentarily flustered but quickly regained her composure.
“I would ask that you leave the citizens within the city center alone. They are
civilians.”
“They are humans, I will do with them what I will.”
This answer stunned Mayor Flisher even further. At first she didn’t know what to say.
Eventually, she hoped to make another plea toward mercy.
“You asked what my proposals were. I will turn over whatever supplies you require
without resistance. I will restrain the citizens and the armed forces to the center of the
city so that you may take what you want without harassment. I will have supply carts
gathered for you and allow you as much time as needed to load them with whatever you
want. Take what you will, but leave the citizens unharmed.”
The serp stared into the mayor’s eyes and almost laughed.
“I will take the city itself,” the serp stated gleefully. “You think I am here simply to
raid your supplies and be on my way. I have some very unhappy news for you. I am here
to stay. That was my intention from the beginning.”
“But what would you want with our city?” the mayor asked frantically.
“Everything. The structures of this place shall house my minions, your supplies will
feed them and arm them. The people of this place shall serve them. This place will
become the first human city to fall under my rule.”
“You can’t be serious!” the mayor cried.
Captain Tevor said nothing. He considered all that had happened in the past few
moments and realized that if the serp wanted the city, there was very little he could do to
delay him, let alone stop him.
“In fact, it is truly already mine,” Sazar stated with confidence. “I want you to see
something. Walk with me now.”
Sazar turned about and headed north back to the outskirts of the city. After passing a
few alleys and side roads, he could see one of his bloat spiders apparently dangling in the
air suspended over the main road that led out of this section of town and into the northern
plains. As they walked closer, it became apparent that the swollen body of the spider was
actually clinging to an enormous web that stretched across the street from one end to the
other. The few remaining snow flakes that drifted out of the sky stuck to the web strands,
making them appear thicker and of uneven size.
The mayor and Captain Tevor stared at the hideous creature in the center of the web.
Its dark brown body was heavy and very round with small patches of thick hair
protruding from different areas. Its six legs were narrow and seemed inadequate in
strength to hold the disproportionate sized body. At its mouth waited the tips of two small
fangs that protruded out of protective sacks.
“A bloat spider can make a web of this size in a very short amount of time. This one
started the moment you gave your order to the cavalry to leave. Others have since begun
making similar webs all around your city. At this point, they are close to successfully
blocking nearly every road exiting the city. You could not escape if you wanted to. I
know which areas remain unblocked and I have order my shags to guard them. My
goblins will now use these to enter the city.”
Sazar then gave a mental command to the enormous shag that served as his body
guard. The monster dashed out of a dark alley and quickly took hold of the bewildered
mayor. As the monster ran toward the web, she froze in terror in the grip of the shag.
“Captain,” Sazar commanded, “do not do anything rash. For the sake of your men that
are waiting at the city center, you need to be alive to ensure their survival.”
Captain Tevor was forced to watch as the shag threw mayor Flisher into the web very
near the face of the bloat spider. The creature’s two front legs pulled the mayor closer
toward it as the remaining four limbs clung to the web to keep it supported. The spider
wasted no poison on its victim for it was too hungry. The fangs pierced the mayor at her
left side just above her waist and the insect began to feed immediately.
Without poison to numb her, the mayor felt everything and her screams could be
heard far into the distance. She flailed with the one arm that had not been caught in the
unbreakable grip of the spider’s web, but it only made dull thuds against the creature’s
thick hide. After agonizing moments that seemed more like an eternity, her screams died
down to whispered cries and then silence.
Sazar looked to Tevor and spoke without glee, without satisfaction, but with a tone of
unheralded seriousness.
“Captain, I’m allowing you to live because of all the people in this city, I believe you
will understand the situation the best. You would have preferred to fight then to
surrender, even if it meant death. Death in the clutches of a bloat spider, however, is not
quite the same as death in battle. The truth of the matter is that I now control your city
and battle is no longer an option.
“Your elite fighters are now gone. Access to the city is under my complete power. The
spiders have restricted access and shags now control the streets. My hook hawks and
razor crows provide surveillance and can strike at any point in the city. The full
compliment of my goblin horde is now entering the city through the only clear passages
my spiders have allowed. They now take cover in your very structures.
“I am aware you have foot soldiers that were moved from outer entrenchments into
the center of the city to protect the civilian population. They are truly insufficient in
force. There is no way they could possibly break out of the city to escape, thus they are
stuck where they are. The interior of your city has suffered the most damage from the
dwarves and it is not truly a defensible position. Put simply, I would not even have to
attack the remnants of your militia. I could cut off the supplies, pick off your inhabitants
from a distance with goblin crossbow fire, send in my hawks, or simply burn the interior
of the city to the ground. I’m telling you this so you understand the situation.”
“I understand it fine,” the captain growled with hate.
“Actually, you don’t,” Sazar corrected him. “I am aware that humans cling to hope,
even when hope is small. The hope I give you is this; I will allow the people of this city
to return to their normal activities, at least for the most part. The farmers will return to
their farms to grow food, miners will return to the hills to mine metals, and your artisans
will be set to do the work they are trained to do. The only difference is that they are now
doing their work for me.
“Your city suffered a great loss in numbers from the dwarf attack. That much is
obvious. With a reduced population, your farms around the city provide a great surplus of
food. The people of this town will continue to be fed. The surplus, however, will belong
to me and my army. What the miners take from the ground will be used to make armor
and weapons, and again, they will belong to me. Those humans that do not farm or do not
mine will be required to work toward making weapons, supply carts, armor, or anything
else I need.
“Do not mistake my offer as a chance for escape. The goblins will patrol the farms,
the shags the hills, and my flying minions will remain in the skies over and around the
city. Anyone that is caught trying to escape will be thrown to the bloat spiders. Anyone
unwilling to work will be thrown to the bloat spiders. Anyone trying to disrupt my
supplies will be thrown to the bloat spiders. If anyone disobeys any of my rules, they will
be… well, you get the idea now don’t you.
“You can look at it that I am taking everything from you, or you can look at it as I’m
giving you a chance to live. You will wake, work, eat, and sleep, and yes it will be
toward my benefit, but you will live. As long as you live there is hope that one day you
might be freed. I suggest you take the proper perspective.”

Sazar eyed the human before him with a great deal of puzzlement. Normally, the serp
gained a keen insight simply by looking at a person. He could judge their character, their
honesty or lack thereof, and their personality within the first few moments, and he would
usually be fairly accurate in his assessment. He already knew a bit about this man,
however, and what he knew didn’t fit with what he saw.
He knew that Edward Consprite gained the favor of a powerful vampire. He also knew
that at one time this man was the mayor of the city the serp now occupied. This should
indicate the human had guile, savvy, as well as strong leadership qualities. Further,
Consprite’s association with the vampire would have made Sazar bet most of his goblin
army that the man was gifted with a great deal of charisma; that Consprite would have
filled any room he entered with a great presence of personality. Sazar would have lost
that bet.
Consprite had made his appearance known by simply walking out into the open. He
had moved directly to a goblin in the streets as if walking up to a town guard to ask for
directions. This particular goblin was under orders to assess the human occupation of an
undamaged dwelling close to the city’s western border. The ex-mayor stepped in front of
the diminutive monster and grumbled that he was Edward Consprite and wanted to see
Sazar. The goblin almost made the dreadful mistake of plunging a short sword into the
man’s belly. This would have certainly caused unnecessary conflict with Janindise.
Luckily, however, Sazar caught the exchange in his mind and commanded the goblin to
send the human forward before any damage was done.
Consprite had walked through the streets with a determined pace, but his legs
appeared stiff and his feet shuffled across the ground. With clothes that appeared far too
large for his frame and a slouch in his shoulders, he appeared more of a transient hobo
than a man that once held the position of leadership in this city. And though his
appearance would seem to indicate a severe lack of self-confidence, in absolute
opposition to this, he walked by shags and packs of goblins with utter disregard.
Sazar had kept an active mental link to the minions that watched Consprite pass
through the streets. The images he captured contrasted greatly with what he anticipated.
When Consprite had reached his final destination, a large merchant’s home that the serp
now called home, he saw the man enter without fanfare or grace, but with all the dignity
of a pauper entering a soup kitchen. Sazar could not fathom how this man gained the
favor of a vampire, and with Consprite now standing right before him, the concept was
even more bizarre.
Consprite appeared more of an empty shell than a vibrant living being. The skin
around his eyes and cheeks hung heavy with many wrinkles as it did around his neck and
hands. This loose skin along with a gray pallor made the human look like a man that had
been lost at sea for days on end. What was left of his hair hung long and loose about his
head as if long ago he decided not to bother cutting or combing it.
Truly, this was not what Sazar expected, and the serp gained another surprise when he
looked in the man’s eyes. He did not see the bubbling spark of life there, or charisma of
any type. This was not a man that could hypnotize you with his eyes and thus didn’t
worry about the rest of his appearance. What Sazar saw in the eyes of this man was a
single-minded focus, a disregard for everything else that went on around him. Consprite
was here to talk to Sazar and anything else was simply irrelevant. Sazar acknowledged
the man before him with caution as well as curiosity.
“Good day, Mr. Consprite. As you must already know, I am Sazar. As I am also sure
you already know I have met your friend. She told me you have the idea that you might
be of some assistance to me. I must be brutally honest, I’m not quite sure of what
someone like you can do for me.”
“What I can do for you all depends on what you want,” Consprite spewed his words
with gruffness.
“What I want I am well on my way to achieving. The city is mine.”
“Yes, it seems to be,” Consprite replied with almost a tone of sarcasm. “You have
them surrounded, you have taken the outer limits, but you have not yet moved into the
inner portions of the city. Why not?”
Sazar seemed a bit taken aback by Consprite’s question. First, when the ex-mayor
spoke of ‘them’, he clearly differentiated himself from the rest of the citizens of Connel.
Second, he appeared to be questioning Sazar almost as if the serp was a subordinate.
That, the serp did not like.
“Are you in some rush?” Sazar asked.
“How long it takes is irrelevant to me, but when you say the city is yours you need to
be a bit more specific. You said you weren’t sure what I could do for you. I am quite sure
I can offer you something. The problem is I don’t know what you really want. I know the
people of this city. I know how they will react.”
“Then you know if I simply rush my army into the center of the city, it will only create
panic. I’m not looking to do that, panic is messy, and it lacks control.”
Consprite squinted at the serp, mumbled something incoherently and then began to
pace around the room.
“So you don’t want to just kill them all,” Consprite said as he continued to move
about. “If you did, you wouldn’t care how messy it was. Actually, I’m guessing the
goblins you have at your beck and call would enjoy it more if it was very messy.”
“That’s very perceptive of you,” the serp hummed.
“And don’t bother trying to compliment me. I really don’t care what you think of me.”
“Is that so? It is you that came to me,” the serp pointed out. “You are the one that said
you can help me. If I don’t think highly of you, why would I trust you to help me?”
“Because I know I can help you,” Consprite replied brusquely. “It’s just a matter of
figuring out how. If you did want to kill everyone here, I’m sure you can handle that on
your own, but if you want to know where they keep their most valuable supplies,
wouldn’t it be easier if I simply told you rather than have your goblins waste time
searching for it.”
“Yes I suppose it would.”
“Is that what you want? Do you want to claim this town’s most valuable possessions?”
“That is certainly part of it,” Sazar confirmed, “and perhaps you can help me with
that. There is, however, more to it than simply taking the material items of value.”
“What else are you looking for?”
Sazar saw no true danger in making it very clear what he wanted, and so he spoke
without hesitation.
“I am going to take everything this city has to offer me, both substantial and
insubstantial. I will not be leaving it in the foreseeable future. It will become the center of
my operations as I focus on growing my army. When my forces become stronger, which
now they certainly will, I will begin to move eastward. I do not limit my ambitions to the
borders of Connel.”
“I see, and what do you plan to do with the humans that live here now?”
“I plan to have them serve me. They will grow my food, mine my metals, and fashion
my weapons.”
“If they resist?” Consprite asked but showed no true concern.
“They will die most unpleasantly. I have already made an example of one of them,
their mayor, a human named Flisher. Do you know of her?”
“I do,” Consprite grunted. “She’s dead?”
“Most painfully, I assure you.”
In truth, Consprite hated Flisher, though there were others he hated more. Still, he
wondered aloud if it was such a good idea to remove her so quickly. “If you plan to keep
the inhabitants of the city under your control was it such a good idea to kill their leader?
She wasn’t a real threat to you and she could have been used to keep order.”
“I did not like her,” Sazar admitted. “While she appeared to understand the situation,
I don’t think she would have effectively conveyed the seriousness of the situation to her
followers. By dying as she did, she served my purposes much more efficiently.”
“So who’s going to keep the people in line now that she’s gone?”
“Are you volunteering?” Sazar asked with an almost challenging tone.
“Absolutely not,” Consprite replied resolutely. “While I still believe I can help you,
I’m sure it wouldn’t be in that way. These people mean nothing to me any more and they
know it. They wouldn’t listen to me any more than they would listen to one of your
goblins.”
“Very good,” the serp nodded. “At the very least, I can see you have a grasp of the
situation and do not waste my time in making promises you obviously couldn’t keep. As
it stands, I have someone that I will use to keep the people in line, as you put it. I already
have utilized your Captain Tevor to carry my message to the humans. He will be much
more convincing when he explains to them what they face and what they must do. He
will also keep his men in check, at least for a while until he realizes there really is no
hope left for them. Then I will probably have to throw him to the bloat spiders as well.
By then, I will have taken full control of the city and it will no longer matter.”
It was Sazar’s turn to pace across the floor, and as he did his tail swayed back and
forth with his own thoughts. He considered what he just learned of Consprite. Here was a
human that did not like the people of Connel, and they probably shared no love for him.
Consprite developed a close relationship with a vampire and showed no reservations in
dealing with shags, goblins, or even a serp. In every way, this human appeared to be
acting in a very non-human way. This consideration brought to mind one of Sazar’s more
immediate problems.
While Sazar needed Captain Tevor to keep the humans in check, at least for the
immediate future, he also needed someone to help him in another area. For Captain Tevor
to remain useful to Sazar he needed to be respected and, even more so, trusted by the
humans that the serp wished to control. This other role that Sazar required necessitated
characteristics of just the opposite. Sazar believed that Consprite offered him exactly
what he needed, and he offered up his considerations freely in order to judge if his
estimation was correct.
“Actually, Edward Consprite, there is something that you might be able to do for me. I
have one problem that I am somewhat concerned about. You see, some of the people of
this town must be, oh how shall I put it, perhaps sacrificed is the proper word. I made an
agreement with a sorceress in the Lacobian Desert. My part of the agreement requires
that I supply her with subjects so that she may test her spells. I clearly plan to send some
of these humans to her, but I have not yet figured out the best way to do this. I wish to
maintain control here, and I want the humans to believe that they will ultimately be
allowed to live even if it is under my rule. As long as they believe the life I offer them is
better than being thrown to a bloat spider, I believe they will remain useful to me. If,
however, they realize that many of them will be sent to their deaths at the hands of an
experimenting sorceress, they might get other ideas. They might actually rebel, and that is
my problem.”
“So you need to select humans that you can send out into the desert without alarming
the entire population?” Consprite asked with little regard to the implications of such a
dilemma.
“You understand very well,” Sazar said.
“That is a problem I can solve for you without hesitation,” Consprite answered with
almost a note of glee in his voice. “I know exactly where to get your first group of
subjects, and the rest of this town will not care one bit. They may even be pleased to see
them go.”
“Really?”
“There is a Church of Godson in this city,” Consprite now noted with more disgust
than cheer. “I suggest you start with them.”
The serp showed a sign of amazement at such a suggestion.
“You think I should base the selection of people on some religious segmentation? Do
you really think that is wise? I like to believe I understand humans, at least to a degree.
Their beliefs in religious matters tend to stir some rather interesting passions. To me, that
seems very dangerous.”
“Don’t kid yourself. This is not some established, respected church. They are nothing
but a bunch of loons. They will not be missed. And it certainly will not stir any kind of
concern in the rest of the people here.”
“I would imagine the Church of Godson might have gained new respect,” Sazar
wondered aloud. “After all, their beliefs contain such creatures as goblins, and shags, and
even serps. Now that the people face such creatures in reality, I would have guessed that
more humans might have sought out this church.”
“Oh yes, they have grown in number,” Consprite admitted, “but not so drastically that
they outnumber those that mistrust them. Many in this city even blame them. Not many
here are happy with what has happened since the sphere was destroyed. I’m sure that now
you’re here, they’re even more unhappy. But the followers of that church, they were
ready to accept all of this before it even happened. A lot of people think they even
welcomed it. How do you think people that are surrounded by goblins are going to feel
about a church that welcomed the return of dark creatures?”
“You have a point. Still, I believe care is required. I don’t want it made known exactly
what is going on. I would like to see these people removed from the city without
alarming the rest of the population.”
“That’s the beauty of it,” Consprite said. “They keep to themselves as it is. All you
have to do is go to their church and you can probably find several dozen there right now.
Keep them isolated and send them out to the desert in small groups. No one else has to
know or will even care what’s going on.”
Sazar placed a finger to his chin and tapped a long nail against his cheek and began to
pace once more.
“It’s certainly an easy way to start,” Sazar hummed to himself. “The first few days
will pose the most challenges in maintaining control. I doubt Tabris will be patient
enough to give me more time. No, I have to prove to her that I will maintain my part of
the bargain, so I must begin sending her something immediately.”
Sazar turned about and faced Consprite directly. “Ahhh well, it seems the best
alternative I have. I stand corrected; you have proved to be of assistance to me. I also
wish to make further use of you. I will send you to this Church of Godson with a small
party of goblins and two shags. You will see to it that a number of humans, let us say ten
to begin with, are removed from this church and sent to the western outskirts of the city. I
will instruct my goblins to transport the humans from there to the desert.”
“I have no problem with that.”
“That might be, but I’m not quite finished just yet. If I’m going to fully trust you with
this endeavor, however, there are things I must know about you.”
“Such as?”
“How is it that you have fallen under the protection of this vampire, Janindise?” Sazar
asked.
“I have no problem telling you that, either. No problem at all. I was the mayor of this
city when the sphere of Ingar freed itself from Sanctum. I learned a great deal about
things at that time. I learned there is power far greater than political power, that being
mayor of a city really meant nothing—as Ms. Flisher apparently found out today. The
magic the sphere contained was power, but only if you have the skill to use it.
Unfortunately, I do not have such a skill.”
“Does this story have a point, and if so, will it answer my question?” the serp
interrupted.
“Fine, you want the short version. There was a delver named Ryson Acumen that was
hired to find out about the sphere. I had this delver followed. My first tracker died, but I
never give up easily. After an encounter with this delver right here in Connel, things
spiraled downhill quickly. I was removed as mayor. I decided to hire additional trackers
to pick up the trail of Acumen to find out every place he had traveled. With nothing else
to do, I followed along, learning as much as I could. During these travels, we happened
upon Janindise. She would not attack us, so I was able to speak with her. She asked what
brought me to her, and I told her the truth, that I had been retracing the steps of Ryson
Acumen. It seems she hates the delver as much as I do. In this, we found common
ground, and I make no effort to hide that fact. I was out of money and unable to convince
the trackers to work with a vampire that could only move at night. The trackers left me. I,
however, understood that Janindise could be a great asset. I stayed with her, even
convinced her to return with me to Connel.”
“And why does Janindise hate this delver?” the serp inquired.
“That is her business, and I do not speak of it. One of the reasons she graces me with
her companionship is that I respect her wishes. She has no problem with me revealing our
mutual hate for Ryson Acumen, but she has made it clear she does not like to speak of
her experience with the delver.”
“I see. I do have one last question before you leave. Why do you wish to be assistance
to me in the first place?”
“When you cut me off before, I tried to tell you I have a new understanding of power.
I see such power in you. I do not fear you because Janindise protects me. When I prove
my worth to you, I will gain yet another ally. Power is in the friends you keep, even if
you might not be able to trust them.”

The mood in the Church of Goodson did not quite match that of the rest of the human
population in Connel. Certainly, there was fear and anxiety over the encroaching goblin
horde, but not to the same extent as from those that hid in dark basements or empty
alleys. On the faces of the followers that sat in the unassuming church, there hung a
simple acceptance, as if these people almost expected what was happening on this terrible
day.
If this were any other place within the city limits, when Edward Consprite walked
through the large doors accompanied by two large shags and followed by a half dozen
goblins, panic would have exploded throughout everyone present. In this church,
however, the followers simply remained silent and began to pray silently.
The spiritual leader of the church, Reader Matthew made no attempt to calm the other
followers of Godson. There was no need. Instead, he simply took a deep breath, and with
the help of two canes, hopped up to the ex-mayor with grudging acceptance of who was
before him. It didn’t take long for Matthew to recognize Consprite. Though the ex-mayor
was thinner and older in appearance, Matthew could always recognize the deep seeded
hate that languished in the eyes of this man.
“Hello Matthew,” Consprite said with obvious contempt to the Church of Godson’s
leader. “I can see by the look in your eyes you remember me, even though my appearance
has changed somewhat. That’s good.”
Reader Matthew simply nodded as he eyed the ex-mayor and the two large shags that
stood on either side of him. The stench of the two monsters began to fill the room and in
order to keep from gagging, the reader was forced to take short shallow breaths through
his mouth.
Consprite looked over Reader Matthew and regarded the stump that took the place of
his left leg. “I’m going to guess that occurred during the dwarf attack. Am I correct?”
Reader Matthew bit down any anger and answered with an even tone.
“Yes, I lost my leg to a dwarf ax. I still manage to get around.”
“Yes, with two canes and a good deal of hopping. It must get rather tiring.”
“I manage. Now, if you don’t mind, the people here are very alarmed with what’s
going on. The presence of these two shags is adding to that concern. May I ask what you
want here?”
Consprite looked over the rows of benches that were half full with silent followers of
Godson.
“They don’t look alarmed.”
“Would you prefer they ran screaming out any exit they could find?”
“All exits are blocked on the outside,” Consprite remarked with a smirk.
“How comforting.”
“Still I am curious,” Consprite admitted. “I would have expected much more concern
among your followers considering what’s going on outside. You have heard of what’s
going on, haven’t you?”
“We are well aware of the situation,” Matthew replied, but his calm demeanor made it
seem as if nothing of any great importance was going on outside the walls of his church.
Consprite continued to find the reader’s reaction most perplexing, even slightly
annoying.
“And here I am with two shags at my side and you walk right up to me as if I’m an
invited guest. You don’t think that’s surprising?”
“As I said before, what would you have me do?”
“I would have you explain to me what’s going on here before I decide to have these
shags start tearing your church apart.” Consprite warned.
Reader Matthew looked over his shoulders to those that remained seated but now
appeared a bit more anxious over the shags in their midst. He nodded his head and turned
his attention back to the ex-mayor.
“This is from the Book of Godson,” the reader offered, and he began to quote text
from the book that represented his faith. “‘And the dark ring will come to the last plain
city, diminished but not destroyed. In the whiteness of night, that which was silent shall
be heard. Not an arrow shall fly, not a blade broken and still the city shall fall.’”
Reader Matthew paused as he raised his eyebrows toward the ex-mayor. Consprite did
not reply, other than a shrug, and Mathew explained further.
“That may sound confusing to you, but we knew what those words meant before this
serp of yours even came to this land. ‘The last plain city’ is Connel, the final city of the
farmland plains before the Colad Mountains. ‘Diminished but not destroyed’—certainly
the dwarves put great damage to the city, but we were not quite destroyed. ‘The
whiteness of night’, I’m sure that sounds very confusing until you think of the snow that
fell last night. And for the last part, the goblins were silent, but then they shrieked when
they wanted us to see them. Connel has fallen into the serp’s hands and yet there was no
true battle. This prophesy was explained clearly to us many seasons ago, by a special
person who is no longer with us. He understood the prophesies clearly and he told us
what they meant before the sphere ever broke free from Sanctum Mountain. You see, we
knew this would all happen long before this day ever came.”
“So you think that because your book of fairy tales told you the goblins would take the
city that this would somehow save you?” Consprite questioned with more than a hint of
sarcasm.
“Save us? No, only Godson can save us, but that’s not what you asked. You wanted to
know why we could appear so calm in the face of such danger. We are not happy about
what is going on, but we realize it’s all part of Godson’s plan. Giving in to panic would
not help us, only faith can help us.”
“I’m happy to hear that,” Consprite laughed. “I didn’t want to ruin any false hopes.
The truth of the matter is that you are anything but saved. You wanted to know why I was
here. I am here for a good long time, and no one is leaving this place until I send them
away. You see, the serp that now rules Connel is in need of some humans. It seems he
made a deal with a sorceress out in the desert. This sorceress wishes to practice her
newfound craft, but there really isn’t anything out in the desert other than some
scorpions. She needs something a bit bigger. Knowing you as well as I do, I felt you and
your followers would be perfect for the task. The serp asked me to select ten of your
followers and send them to the Lacobian so they might assist the sorceress in her practice.
What do you think about that?”
Reader Matthew adjusted his stance so he could hold both canes in his left hand while
he kept his weight balanced on his remaining leg. He pulled a worn book from his pocket
and he began to read.
“‘A snake will walk out of the sand but to the hot wind he pays his mind. Those of
faith must retrace the path to appease a witch’s bargain.’” Upon completing that passage,
Matthew looked back to the former mayor. “Would you like to read that yourself? It’s
right here.”
Matthew opened the book wider and held it out for Consprite to see. The ex-mayor
slapped it out of his hand, but Matthew simply watched it fly to the floor and did nothing
more.
“That’s not a problem,” Matthew revealed. “I have the book memorized by now.
What’s important is that you understand that none of this will weaken our faith.”
“Is that so?” Consprite growled. “Well, since you’re so prepared for this, I will give
you the honor of selecting the first ten. You will go back to your followers and pick out
six men and four women, make one a child, I don’t care which, and these ten will be sent
to the Lacobian.”
Matthew stiffened his back and looked defiantly into Consprite’s eyes. “I will not.
You can order these beasts to rip my arms off, and then my remaining leg. You can throw
me to the bloat spiders I’ve heard encase this city. I will not do what you ask. You can
threaten me with anything, but I will not do your dirty work for you.”
In a moment of pure defiance, Reader Matthew held out his right arm to the largest of
the two shags and waited for Consprite to give whatever order came to his depraved
mind.
Consprite, however, showed his depravity went much further then Matthew would
have considered. He turned to the large shag and gave his order.
“Take him,” Consprite then yelled to one of the goblins behind him, “but he is not one
of the ten. He will go to the Lacobian with the ten and all that follow. He is to watch as
every member of his church is turned over to the will of the sorceress. You are to make
sure that message is given to her. He is not to die until the last of this church’s followers
are exhausted. Then hopefully she will test a particularly painful spell on him.”
Consprite then looked into the eyes of Matthew as he hung in the tight clutches of the
shag. “I will pick the ten and then ten after that. I will review the logs of this church and
make sure that every member of your church is located no matter where they are hiding. I
will send them all and you will watch them die.”
Reader Matthew threw no curse at the ex-mayor. He simply asked a question.
“Don’t you want to hear how this is all going to turn out? Aren’t you interested in
what’s going to happen to this city? Let me give you one last quote. ‘An enemy past, a
friend in the future, a debt repaid in full. Cities linked, one below saved by the light of
speed, one above rescued by what moves in shrouded passage.’ I know what that means,
but I have no desire to tell you. May Godson have mercy on your soul.”
“No one is going to have mercy on yours,” Consprite retorted. “And I could care less
what’s in your book of fairy tales. Get him out of here.”

Up in the dark rafters of Connel’s Church of Godson, a silent Lief Woodson watched
with an anger growing within him. His fury boiled until he felt the rage running further
up in his throat, but he managed to remain quiet. At one point, he took an arrow from his
quiver and readied his bow to fire at Consprite’s heart. Unfortunately, he also knew a
very real truth, and so he never took the shot.
Even if he killed Consprite at this very moment, he would only gain the people of this
church a momentary reprieve. He could not defeat the whole goblin army or get these
people past the shags and bloat spiders that surrounded the city. Sazar remained beyond
his reach, always protected by hook hawks and other dark creatures. Killing Consprite
would not free Connel, and thus the people of this church would still end up being sent to
Tabris.
He returned the arrow to his quiver and cursed silently. If he was going to truly save
these people, he needed help.

Sy considered what he heard so far from the elf. The news was grim, but not
completely unexpected. The captain of Burbon’s guard knew something of significance
had transpired to the east, and he made it clear that the report the elf gave him was not
truly a surprise.
“I’ve had reports come in from all different sources over the past day and a half,” Sy
confirmed. “I’ve heard from scouts and merchants traveling the roads. It’s been pretty
clear Connel was the target of something big. None of the news was good, and most of it
came from fairly reliable sources. It’s getting rather common to hear about strange events
and strange creatures, especially from those that travel this far out. When reports start to
pile up, though, you know it’s time to worry. I was just about call to for Ryson and ask
him to go scout the farmlands to the west of Connel when I was sent word you were at
the gate.”
Lief Woodson waved aside any need for such an endeavor. “I can tell you anything
you need to know. I have been tracking the goblin movements for some time. I was
hoping they would lead me to Sazar. Unfortunately, I never was able to pinpoint the serp,
though I am absolutely sure he is in control and currently in the city.”
“From what you’ve told me, I would have to agree.” Sy shook his head in disgust. “I
knew this serp was going to be a problem the first time I saw him. I just didn’t dream he
could cause this much trouble.”
“Indeed, he is now a great danger. His army is large and well coordinated. They
moved through the forest with a single purpose, and yet they never formed into one large
unit until they hit the hills outside of Dark Spruce. When they came together, they moved
with care and avoided detection until they were ready to attack. They took over the city
without resistance. ”
“The fact they took the city without having to fight isn’t really a great surprise to me,
either,” Sy said. “Connel was pretty much devastated by the dwarves. I know they were
focusing on rebuilding their army ever since the dwarf attack. They seemed to be moving
fairly well along to that end, but there’s no way they could have trained enough soldiers
in this short of time to really form an effective brigade. From my reports, the only unit of
any true experience that was not decimated by the dwarves was their cavalry.”
“Their cavalry left the city under the banner of surrender. They were allowed to leave
without casualties. They moved out of the city from the south and then turned due east.
They rode out well beyond the farmlands, beyond my sight.”
Sy raised an eyebrow. “Really?”
The conversation was interrupted as three individuals quickly entered Sy’s command
post. Lief Woodson had asked for Ryson and the wizard Enin, but he was more than
somewhat surprised to see Holli. The sight of her opened up a painful wound.
“So here is where you’ve decided to live out your exile?” Lief asked of the elf guard.
“It seemed reasonable,” Holli replied simply.
“An elf guard living among humans? Even if it is a human town you have previously
helped protect, even if there are those here that you can call friend, it seems very wrong.
You were trained to protect the elves of the forest.”
“Now I am training in a different way. While I do feel I help protect the people of this
town, my true duty is to the wizard.”
Lief eyed Enin, but Sy cut off the conversation.
“Lief asked that I bring you here,” the captain stated with authority. “He has some
rather bad news. We were all wondering what Sazar would do when he teamed up with
the sorceress, well now we know. An exceptionally large force of goblins reinforced with
shags, hook hawks, and razor crows has taken Connel.”
“Connel was attacked?” Ryson blurted out in obvious concern.
“Attacked is not the appropriate word,” Sy responded quickly. “From what I have
heard, the goblins encircled the city and forced a surrender. Every report I have,
including from Lief who was in the city at the time, indicates that the people in Connel
surrendered and there were very little casualties.”
“This can’t be right,” Ryson argued. “How could he force Connel to surrender? He’s a
lousy serp.”
“A serp with the assistance of a powerful sorceress,” Sy reminded him. “Lief has
reported to me the size of the goblin army was massive enough to completely surround
the city. You know how big Connel is. Think of how many goblins it would take to
encircle the whole city. Now add some shags for support and hook hawks for aerial
assaults and it’s not unreasonable to believe that Connel surrendered, especially after the
beating they took from the dwarves.”
“But why Connel?” Ryson persisted, “And what’s he doing there now?”
“As your captain stated,” Lief answered, “I have been in Connel. The serp appears to
want to hold the city for his own gain. He has used the goblins not to kill the inhabitants
but to control them. He has herded them into Connel’s center. Bloat spiders encircle the
city at its very edges. They have spun vast webs to block access to the city. Those few
roads that are clear are guarded carefully. I have heard his orders as they were delivered
to the people that live there. They are to toil for the serp’s behalf. For the most part, they
will be allowed to resume their daily lives, as long as what they do serves the better good
of Sazar. Just call them slaves.”
Ryson grew more enraged by the moment. “He’s just going to take over Connel and
work the people to a slow death?”
“I’m afraid for some death will come much quicker,” Lief continued with what he
knew of Sazar’s plans. “While most will be allowed to live in order to benefit Sazar, the
followers of Godson, they are another matter entirely. Sazar needs to send humans to
Tabris so that she may test her spells upon them. I assume it is payment for the power she
has granted him. The human that was mayor of Connel when we were dealing with
Ingar’s sphere—the one named Consprite—he has somehow joined the ranks of Sazar.
He has convinced the serp that this group of Godson followers would be the best to send
to Tabris. Of this, I am sure. I heard it myself and saw them take the first prisoners from
the church to be brought to the Lacobian Desert. This included their leader, the Reader
Matthew. They left before I did and are therefore already on their way to Tabris. And
when those followers are no more, you can bet he will send another group and another
group, and on and on.”
“We can’t let this happen!” Ryson demanded.
“No, we can’t,” the elf answered bluntly. “That’s why I’m here. I could do nothing
alone. In fact there is little that anyone could do except…”
Lief turned to Enin. He was about to continue until he looked deeply at the expression
on the wizard’s face. He then looked at Holli and his suspicion was confirmed.
“You knew this!” Lief accused. “You knew Connel had fallen to Sazar.”
“Yes, I did,” Enin admitted sadly.
“And you did nothing to stop it?!”
“No, it is not my place.”
Lief’s eyes opened in wide shock. “I came here to gain your assistance. I thought once
you knew of what was going on you would be more than willing to put an end to this.
You have the power to wipe the city clean of Sazar’s filth.”
“Power?” Enin questioned. “People say I have been blessed with power. That is only
partially true. What I really have been blessed with is a true and complete understanding
of that power. That is the true gift I have received. I understand what I can and can’t do;
what I should and shouldn’t do. I understand the gift can be changed at any time or taken
away completely. I always act within the boundaries of that understanding.”
“What in the name of Godson does that mean?” Lief demanded.
“It means I can’t interfere.”
Rage filled the elf. “Interfere?! This is not interference. It is your responsibility, your
duty! Fire upon your soul if you do nothing! You alone have the power to destroy this
dark army and you would stand there and tell me you won’t because you think it would
be interfering?!”
Enin held to his position. “It would be.”
At this point even Ryson regarded Enin’s words with bewilderment, and he made as
such known. “Enin, this isn’t interference. Sazar attacked Connel. We can’t just stand
here and do nothing about it. At some point, you have to accept that this serp can’t be
allowed to get away with anything he wants. People, good people, are going to die. You
can stop it.”
“And when I do and free Connel, where does it end?” Enin asked. “Tomorrow I hear
that goblins are raiding an outpost near the Colad Mountains, do I go there and destroy
them or is an outpost too small to care about? The next day I find that river rogues are
attacking a small elf camp, do I assist them or should I just worry about humans? The day
after that I hear that razor crows are swarming over an algor desert community, do I wipe
the air clear of them, or should I simply keep my attention on these surrounding lands?”
He paused only for a moment to look around the room at the faces that revealed more
surprise than understanding. He continued with his own concerns of the consequences to
his actions.
“And when I’m done providing my assistance to all those I deem worthy, what
happens next? I have opened the door for every spell-caster in the land to do the same.
The problem is that each spell caster may not be of like mind. Perhaps there are sorcerers
out there that wish to help the dark creatures. Would that be just as acceptable?”
“Help the dark creatures?” Lief asked in absolute disgust. “What are you talking
about?”
“I’m telling you there are consequences to my decisions, consequences you don’t
understand.”
“What I don’t understand is how you will allow an army of dark creatures to run free
and cause great harm to others. You have the ability to save these people and yet you
deny them that aid!”
“I can’t tell you how much I feel for the people of Connel,” Enin replied with great
empathy. “I wish I could help them, but I can not act solely on sympathy.”
Sy stepped in between the elf and the wizard just as Lief was about to explode with
anger. The captain, however, turned his attention to the wizard.
“Enin, this isn’t just about Connel. What’s going on has put everyone here in danger.
The elf is more right than probably he even understands. It’s not simply just a matter of
saving the people of Connel. We also have to save ourselves. We face all kinds of threats,
some of them direct, some of them indirect. I swore to protect the people of this town.
Keeping them safe also means keeping them alive. No one is going to be left living here
for long with Connel in Sazar’s hands”
“If Sazar is foolish enough to attack here, I will defend my home.” Enin stated simply.
“If it comes to that, then it is not interfering. If I am brought into the conflict, then I am
free to act. There is a difference, however, between defending and attacking.”
Sy stood silent as if trying to comprehend what the wizard just said to him. He
revealed that he could not.
“I have to admit, I don’t understand your logic at all,” Sy stated firmly. “You’re not
making any sense whatsoever, but that doesn’t even matter. If you’re telling me you can
defend your home, then you best start thinking about doing it now. I was serious when I
said we were in danger. I meant all of us, everyone in Burbon.”
Holli presented a question of her own at this point. “You think Sazar would attack
Burbon in greater numbers to offset the wizard’s power?”
Sy looked at Holli only for a moment. He looked back at the wizard with a discerning
eye. He spoke of Enin with brutal honesty.
“I’m not even sure how to answer that right now. I’ve got the feeling Sazar could
increase his numbers a hundredfold and he still wouldn’t be a true threat to Enin. Truth is,
I wonder if anything could offset his power, if he’s willing to use it. But it seems like he’s
unwilling unless he’s attacked directly. The problem is Sazar doesn’t have to attack us
directly. He doesn’t have to come to Burbon’s walls, he can starve us out. We depend on
Connel’s farms for food and supplies. With those cut off from us, we don’t have many
options. I mean really, what can we do? How long can we last? Maybe we can start
farming the surrounding fields and hope to protect them, but how long will that take?
Maybe we can even hunt in Dark Spruce, but that’s going to be tough going during the
dormant season. What then, Enin? Will you help us destroy Sazar’s army when we start
to starve?”
Enin said nothing.
Sy simply turned away from the wizard. “Well, I’m not going to wait for an answer
from you because I already know enough of what’s going on out there.” Sy then pointed
to the map on his wall. “Even before the dormant season began, I’ve had my scouts go on
long patrols. I’ve sent Ryson out dozens of times to cover areas throughout Dark Spruce
and up to the Colad Mountains. Each time I ask them to report on the number of goblin
raiding parties they come across. I’ve been keeping track of their movements and
numbers for some time and the information is anything but encouraging news. Their
numbers are swelling by leaps and bounds. I have no idea how they end up appearing in
this land, but I know more come each day. Before today I thought they were broken up,
splintered in hundreds, maybe thousands of small groups all over Dark Spruce, the Colad
Mountains, and Godson knows where else. But now it seems like Sazar is bringing them
together. He’s apparently brought enough together to take Connel, but the thing is, I don’t
think he’s done yet. I think he’s only got a fraction of what’s out there.
“Now, think for a moment what happens when all these goblin packs that are spread
over the forest, the mountains, and maybe even the desert hear that a serp has taken a
human town the size of Connel. You don’t think for a moment they’re not going to seize
on this and head for Connel? How many will end up there? Would anyone have the time
to count that high? And once they’re there, what do they do? They storm every
surrounding farm and take everything they can lay their hands on. And what do we do?
“The simple point is we are not in an enviable position anymore. I don’t care how
powerful Enin is. We now sit with Connel controlled by Sazar. He’s got Godson knows
how many goblins and who knows what other creatures. Our supply lines are now in very
grave danger. We have Pinesway abandoned, so no help there. Dark Spruce is right on
our doorstep, past that to the Northwest is the Colad Mountains and more dangerous
creatures. To the southwest is the Lacobian Desert and I don’t even want to think what
might be waiting for us out there. Yes, we had it good for a while thinking that none of
these creatures would dare anger our good wizard, but those days ended when Sazar took
Connel.”
Sy paused then turned to the delver. “Ryson you told me about what you saw at
Pinesway, when that sword of yours gave you a vision of what Sazar wanted then. He
wanted to make Pinesway a breeding ground for goblins to grow his army. Do you think
he wants any thing different now? Problem is it’s not an abandoned little town at the edge
of Dark Spruce. It’s Connel on the edge of some of the richest farmland around. He’s
going to make humans work on those farms for him. Put this all together and it’s not a
good story for anyone, especially us.”
“So what do we do?” Ryson asked.
Sy looked one last time at Enin, but when the wizard offered nothing further, the
captain took control. “We need to hit the serp now. We hit him with whatever we can
muster. We either drive him and his forces out of Connel, or we have to actually start
thinking about evacuating Burbon, moving east out of his reach.”
“And how do you intend on forcing his goblin army out of Connel,” Holli asked. “I
have seen your guard in action against the dwarves and I know your current strength.
They are excellent defenders, but this action would call for offensive tactics. They would
be vastly outnumbered with the goblins fully entrenched in the city. These are not
welcoming odds for you.”
“No, they are not,” Sy admitted, “and I have no intention of leading my soldiers on a
suicide mission. There is, however, sufficient help to the east. Fort Nebran lies within a
days ride, additional outposts exist less than a day away from the fort. Lief has also told
me that the contingent of Connel’s cavalry escaped to the east when the city surrendered.
I would bet my best horse that they went to Nebran as well. When they hear what’s going
on at Connel, they’re not going to need much incentive to return.
“I’ve had dealings with the officers at Nebran before, and believe me they know the
score. They’re thankful that our town sits between the farmlands and Dark Spruce. Word
has spread of Enin and they know Burbon serves a nice buffer. When they hear an army
of dark creatures has bypassed us and taken Connel, they’ll know that they’re the next
target in line. If we consolidate all our numbers, we can assemble a sufficient force to at
least have a chance. With a little luck, we might be able to take back the city.”
Holli offered one last bit of concern. “What of the bloat spiders? Lief said they have
encased most of the city with their webs. How can we attack the city if we can’t get
through the webs?”
“Actually, I believe the spiders will at first work to our advantage. It’s not just a
matter of limiting what enters the city, it’s also a point to consider how fast Sazar can get
his forces out of the city. He may not be able to meet us in the open field. If we know that
in advance, we can make it work to our advantage.” Sy turned to Lief. “This does,
however, raise a question. If the city exits have been covered by the webs of bloat
spiders, how did you manage to get out?”
Lief responded without hesitation. His tone held the simple ring of truth as opposed to
any arrogance in what he was able to accomplish. “I am an elf, not a human. I can climb
up and down the sides of your structures. The spiders only covered the free paths of the
streets knowing that humans would not be able to jump rooftop to rooftop to avoid their
webs. They did not know an elf was present within the city.”
It was then Ryson that raised a concern of his own. “What about the people trapped in
Connel?”
Sy frowned and did not answer.
Ryson pressed with his own understanding of the matter. “If you attack Connel, those
people in there are going to be trapped with the goblins. Sazar could use them as hostages
or simply kill them to keep them from getting in the way.”
“The city is surrounded by webs, Ryson,” Sy reminded him. “I can’t get them out.
There’s no secret passage way that’s going to get them out. I don’t have that kind of
magic.”
Everyone looked at Enin, but the wizard simply stared at the floor. Ryson, however,
quickly ended the uneasy silence as his face lit up like a flare.
“But there is!” Ryson exclaimed.
“Is what?” Sy demanded.
“A secret passage, there is a secret passage. Remember the dwarves attacked Connel
just like they attacked Burbon. They dug tunnels under the city and attacked by appearing
in the city’s center without giving Connel’s army advanced warning. We can use those
tunnels to get the people out.”
Sy stood silent, but only for a moment. Then he quickly dampened the delver’s
proposal. “The dwarves blocked those tunnels after they left the city in ruins.”
“They just block sections, so the humans couldn’t use them to follow them back to
Dunop.”
“Exactly, that means we can’t get through them to get to Connel. It’s enough of a
block that we wouldn’t be able to dig through in time. We can’t wait forever to hit Sazar.
We have to do it now.”
“We couldn’t dig through, but the dwarves could.”
“You think the dwarves are going to help us?” Sy questioned. “The dwarves didn’t
just attack Connel, they attacked Burbon as well. And it wasn’t just a small disagreement,
it was a nasty battle. We lost a lot of lives and they lost much more. Our wizard here
decided to help then and we forced them to retreat. Now I know you told me that they
attacked because their queen ordered them to and I know she’s gone now, but it’s hard
for me to believe the dwarves are going to be willing to assist us after all of that.”
“They owe us, or at least they owe me,” Ryson said simply. “I saved Dunop from the
shadow trees. I also asked for the Cliff Behemoths to come to Dunop. They did and
stopped the sand giants. All I’m asking is for them to do is to clear a few tunnels so we
can get to Connel. They owe me that much.”
“They may not think they owe you anything at all,” Sy responded flatly.
Lief turned to Sy and declared his own considerations. “No, they are stubborn, they
are greedy, they are arrogant, but they are also very proud. They understand that the
delver saved their city. That, they can not deny, and thus they can not deny the debt they
owe him. For them to turn down a simple request would be beyond my comprehension. I
believe they will have to do what he asks out of their own desire to clear that debt. To
deny him that simple request would be an act of dishonor. I believe that would be beyond
them.”
As Sy looked silently at the map on his wall, he considered the many factors they now
faced. In his mind, he calculated the risks of involving the dwarves and the advantages of
freeing the humans of Connel. At the same time, he ran through different scenarios in his
head regarding the possible upcoming battles with the goblins entrenched in the city.
“Let me just think about this for a moment,” Sy stated as he continued to review his
map. “Maybe, just maybe we can use Sazar’s own tactics against him. He surrounded the
city to cut them off from any hope of escape. We can cut them off in the same way, cut
them off and keep them focused on what’s happening just outside the city.”
Sy made a quick calculation of the forces he would need and the soldiers he believed
would be available for the attack.
“Actually, this could all work in our favor if we time it right,” the captain offered as
he turned his attention to Ryson and Lief. “If you really think we can get the dwarves to
open up those tunnels for us, we might have a chance to get those people out of there. We
all have to realize that you’re not just going to be able to guide them all out under Sazar’s
nose, but if I can get a sizeable force to attack the city, Sazar can’t afford to watch over
the people they’ve got caught in there. We start the attack right at nightfall at the
perimeter and Sazar is going to have his attention on us. At the same time, you can start
moving as many people out as you can. Even if we fail to initially defeat Sazar, we can
still succeed by removing his work force. On the outside of the city, we would have him
surrounded. Maybe we can’t get him out of Connel, but at least we would have him
contained, and with no prisoners, no hostages, and no way to get out to the farmlands.
Also, he won’t be able to send humans to Tabris. If we’re right about what’s going on
with her, that’s going to hurt his relationship with her. If she suddenly decides to break
off the deal and strip him of any extra powers, I’m guessing he goes back to being a
regular serp and he won’t be able to control that many creatures scattered all over Connel.
Even if that doesn’t work, we can even think about just burning the city to the ground.”
Holli nodded. “It is a sound plan. You would also succeed in cutting off any new dark
creatures from joining Sazar.”
“Exactly,” Sy agreed. “We’re still going to have to try and do everything we can to
engage the goblin horde to keep them occupied, but at least now we have other options
available to us if we can’t get them out of the city.”
Ryson now offered his own understanding of what needed to be done. “It has to be me
that goes to Dunop. I’m the one that has to make the request. You also can’t send any of
your soldiers with me through the caves. It will slow me down and I need to rely on
speed.”
“I don’t intend to. I agree with you and I also can’t afford to spare any. The few that I
can leave behind will have to guard Burbon. I was hoping, however, that Lief would go
with you. You can use another pair of eyes, and from what I’ve seen, an elf won’t slow
you down that much.”
“I can live with that,” Ryson stated as he looked to Lief expectantly.
“I shall accompany you,” Lief agreed with little fanfare.
Ryson considered the events that transpired the last time the two were together and
wondered if Lief would be able to control his anger in the midst of so many dark
creatures. “You realize we have to go unnoticed, especially when we are in Connel, so
you can’t simply run off and start attacking the goblins. Our objective is to get everyone
out alive, not to start a war once we get in there.”
Lief’s eyes narrowed. “You might no longer believe this, but I can maintain control
when necessary. I was able to get in and out of Connel without being noticed. Do you
think I could have accomplished that if I just started attacking goblins?”
“No, I guess not,” Ryson conceded. “I just wanted to make sure we agree on what our
main purpose was here.”
The elf simply heaved a heavy sigh.
“I wish to accompany them as well,” Holli interjected. “I can help them and while we
need to keep the party small, I think three is better than two. We can all move swiftly and
quietly. When we reach the inner streets of Burbon, I can assist in guiding the humans to
the tunnels.”
Enin finally spoke up. “You wish to go with them?”
“I need to go with them,” Holli answered. “I feel it is my responsibility.”
“How so?” the wizard asked.
“You said that when Tabris decided to join with Sazar it represented her turn toward
an evil path. By your own admission, you used that decision as the reason you were
willing to make me stronger. If she did not turn toward evil, I truly wonder if you would
have trained me at all. That being the case, I believe that I must do all that I can to
counteract any evil this sorceress does. She is responsible for Sazar gaining control of so
many creatures. Without her power, he would be left to raid abandoned outposts in the
northern wilds. Do you understand?”
“Whether I understand or not is immaterial,” the wizard said revealing little emotion.
“If you wish to go with them, that’s your choice.”
“It is not my choice alone. I came here to be your guard, thus my first duty is to you. If
you do not want me to go, if you don’t see the need, then I would stay here. I have to
answer to my duty, and that is to you.”
“No, your first duty is to yourself.” Enin looked about at everyone in the room. “I
know all of you don’t think to highly of me right now, but perhaps this will help explain,
even if it is only slightly.” The wizard turned back to Holli. “I’ve spoken at length about
choice and not interfering. You have a choice, as does everyone in this room. If you
believe it is important for you to go with them, then I would never stand in your way. I
will not take that choice from you. Everyone here wants me to solve this problem. I’ve
tried to make it clear that there are consequences in that action. I know my arguments
seem weak in the face of what everyone is talking about, but you all need to decide for
yourselves what you must do.”
Enin turned and walked to the door. “I still want you as my guard when you return,
but more importantly, I want you to do what you think is right. Good luck to all of you.”
Without waiting for anyone to respond, he walked out the door.
Sy did not let the silence last. He had already begun working out his plans and he now
wanted to move quickly. “How long do you think it will take for you to get to Dunop,
convince the dwarves to help get the tunnels cleared, and get into Connel?”
“Getting to Dunop is easy,” Ryson answered. “Not sure how long it will take for us to
see someone of authority to convince them to help us. That’s the true unknown. When I
left last time, Jon Folarok was basically comatose. He had withdrawn in the wake of
Yave’s rebellion against him and he showed no sign of coming out soon.” Ryson turned
to the elves. “Do either of you have an idea of what’s going on down there?”
Lief spoke up first. “When we delivered Petiole to the dwarf city, Jon Folarok was still
king. There appeared to be order in the city and we have heard no further rumors about
the dwarf separatists that wished to end the rule of the monarchy.”
Holli concurred. “Every report I heard revealed stability has returned to Dunop.”
“Well at least that’s good news,” Ryson replied with a show of relief. “Just about
every dwarf down there is going to remember me and my sword. I ran around the whole
city to kill the shadow trees, so I don’t think there will be a problem getting in. Once
we’re in we need to accompany the dwarves to the tunnels to Connel and allow them time
to clear them.”
“Dwarf construction is a marvel to watch,” Lief added. “It will take little time for
them to clear a path.”
Ryson made a quick calculation based on that. “Dunop isn’t that far from Connel, so if
everything goes smoothly, it should only be three or four days.”
Sy nodded in satisfaction. “I’ll give you a couple of extra days as a buffer. I’m going
to need time to assemble the forces I need to take care of my part. I’ll organize the guard
here today, determine what I need and what I should leave behind to guard Burbon, and
then we’ll ride for Fort Nebran. With their aide, I can have the force ready to move on
Connel in three days. It will take another day to reach Connel from the Fort.”
Sy tapped his fingers on the desk in a counting fashion before continuing. “We will
begin our attack during the evening, right before nightfall, six days out from today. You
should already be under Connel at that time. When you hear us attacking and you believe
its dark enough, you can begin. Get topside and start sending as many people as you can
to the tunnels. Hopefully, in the cover of darkness, Sazar’s attention should be focused on
us. If they do spot the humans fleeing, they will think they are seeking shelter from the
coming battle. I doubt Sazar will care about them.”
Sy tried to play out the battle in his mind. He considered the sequence of events and
revealed his own hopes. “I honestly believe we can raise enough of a force to surround
Connel. That will be more than enough to keep Sazar focused on us. Whatever happens
during the battle, we won’t make any attempt to move toward the inner sections of the
city until daylight, if at all. Some of this is going to depend on how Sazar reacts, but all of
our assaults will be focused on the outskirts of the city. As we attack, it should draw more
of their forces to the city’s outer boundaries. With just the three of you, you’re going to
have to move fast, but I’ve seen you all move and if you coordinate it well, I think you
have a good chance of getting a large portion of them out of there. Is there anything I’m
overlooking?”
Lief pointed out one potential problem. “We must all be wary of the hook hawks and
the razor crows. With their ability to fly over the city, Sazar will have eyes that can see
great distances.”
“Good point. Not sure if there’s anything we can do about them, but I’ll work on it.
Anything else?”
Holli offered what she knew. “Bloat spider webs are difficult to cut, but they will
burn. They will not burst into flame, so the surrounding structures should not be in
danger of catching fire, especially with the current cold in the air. The problem is it takes
time for the smoldering strands to break apart, by that time, the spider is aware of your
presence and will attack.”
“Good to know, anything else?”
No one responded. Sy offered his last sentiment. “We know what we have to do. As
Enin said, good luck to all of us.”

“I don’t want to seem like an ungrateful person,” Linda began as she spoke to Enin
alone in his library. “I asked you to go to speak to Tabris and you did. I was grateful then,
and I still am now. The problem is I need to know why you did this.”
Enin began to speak, stopped, fumbled with his hands, and started over. “I did so
because, as you said, you asked me to. I believe everyone in this town owes you a debt of
gratitude.”
“You told me that last time. I appreciate it, but there’s something missing, something
you’re not telling me.”
“How do you mean?”
Linda circled about the room as if she was getting her words in order before she spoke
them aloud. “Before Ryson left for Dunop, he told me what was going on. He told me
Connel had surrendered to Sazar and that with Tabris’ power Sazar was now a great
threat. He also told me how Sy and most of Burbon’s guard are riding out to Fort Nebran
to get aide so they could try and get Sazar out of the city. From what I’m hearing, we’re
all in a lot of danger, from Burbon to Fort Nebran and maybe beyond that. Many people
are going to risk their lives again.”
“Are you worried about Ryson’s safety again?” Enin interrupted.
“Actually, no, I’m not. He told me he was going into the center of the city through the
dwarf tunnels. That he was going to help people escape from Connel, not fight the
goblins. I guess if I’m worried about anyone, I’m more worried about the soldiers that are
going to have to fight. They’re the ones that are going to be in the most danger.”
“I’m not sure I’m following you,” Enin admitted. “What is it exactly you want to
know? Is it why I warned Tabris or why are so many people in danger?”
“Actually, it has to do with both.” Linda did her best to come right out and say what
she knew. “Ryson told me you wouldn’t help the people of Connel; that you said it would
be interfering.”
“That is very true,” admitted Enin sadly.
“Then why did you help me?” Linda stepped closer to the wizard and looked straight
into his eyes so he could not avoid her. “Why did you warn Tabris not to hurt Ryson?
Isn’t that interfering?”
Enin for all his magical power did not know how to answer that question. He stood
and looked back at Linda, would not avoid her stare, but he could say nothing.
Linda pressed him. “You tried to tell me that Tabris couldn’t kill Ryson, that I had
nothing to worry about, but I persisted and you agreed to help me. It seems to me that
more people need your help now, but you are not as willing to help. You’re telling people
they have to deal with their own problems. If that’s true, why didn’t you tell me I had to
deal with my fears?”
Enin struggled for a moment and then did his best to convey his own understanding of
what he did and why he did it. “I did not truly interfere when I warned Tabris. It is not
within her to kill Ryson, it’s just not a possible course of action. When I went to warn her
on your request, I told her something she would have found out on her own. She even
told me as much. Nothing I did by going to the desert affected anyone’s choice.”
“That’s not true,” Linda said firmly. “It affected my choice. I could have simply
listened to your advice and tried to deal with my fears, but I didn’t. I insisted you go, and
you did. Why would you do this for me and not help the people that are trapped in
Connel? And please don’t tell me it’s because I’m the reason Ryson stays in Burbon. I
know that’s not the whole story. You did this for another reason, something that has to do
with me. I know that, and I need to know what it is.”
Enin folded his hands in front of him. He would not try to avoid the matter any
further. As Linda had done her best to speak directly to the point as possible, it was now
his turn.
“You know you can not touch the magic?” Enin asked.
This simple question forced Linda to look away. Enin, however, was now the
persistent one in driving the conversation.
“You wish to know why I helped you.”
“Yes,” Linda answered in a trembling voice, “and yes I know I can’t touch the
magic.”
“You are an amazing force in that manner. It is beyond being resistant. You are
immune to it, you actually repel it. I do not think it can affect you in any way.”
Linda attempted to end the discussion of this particular topic. “I don’t want to talk
about how I can or can’t use magic. I want to talk about why you helped me.”
“That is what I’m talking about. I’m trying to explain why I felt it was necessary to go
to Tabris for you. Because you have this special gift, there are things…”
“You call it a gift?” Linda interrupted him.
“Absolutely, just as I am gifted to use the magic in extraordinary ways, you are gifted
to be completely immune to it. That means it can not harm you. In this new world we
now live in, that is a tremendous advantage. Think about that for a moment. Magic is a
powerful energy. It is making sweeping changes across the land that no sane person could
have expected. Go back to the last dormant season when we didn’t know about Ingar’s
sphere or magic beyond a simple card trick. Try to tell me that anyone could have
imagined the dark creatures that now walk the land would actually exist in anything other
than a fairy tale. And look at me. I’m a wizard with power on an unimaginable scale. And
now look at you, for all of my power, there’s not a spell that I can cast that can harm
you.”
Linda did not wish to discuss the magic and refocused on the purpose that brought her
here. “I don’t know anything about that, but I know it doesn’t explain why you would
help me and you won’t help others.”
Enin appeared to grow more than slightly irritated at this comment. “First of all, I’m
more than willing to help others. I’m just not willing to interfere on such a large scale.
Second, if you allow me to finish you will understand that it does explain why I went to
Tabris for you.”
Linda bit down on her lip and remained quiet as Enin continued.
“I realize that because you can not feel or touch the magic in any way, it is more of a
mystery to you than perhaps any other being in this land. Very few have the ability to cast
spells of any significance, but even those that are not spell casters can at least sense the
magic. Perhaps that’s why there’s not mass chaos. In the backs of their minds, people
know that the magic is present and that this explains to them the reason for the enormous
changes we face. There really is no other answer. You just can’t take a bunch of goblins,
shags, river rogues and Godson knows what else is out there, throw them into the midst
of reasonable people and not expect them to wonder about their own sanity. But if they
already know something in the very air is different, then they can step back from the
chaos and not lose their minds.
“Now, let’s consider someone that can’t sense the magic—someone like you. You are
holding onto reason simply because everyone else is much more accepting of the
situation. Still, it has to be beyond unnerving to you. You can’t sense the energy because
you can’t touch it in anyway, and it can’t touch you. You have no inner connection with
the magic. If you did, you would have some insight that the power itself is not inherently
evil and that it is not meant to harm us. The rest of us that can touch the magic, even in
small ways, understand that this energy can be used for great things. Magic does not
cause pain, does not cause hardship. It is corrupt beings that use the power with evil
intentions that cause the troubles we face. You, however, can not touch the magic, so it
remains an absolute unknown to you.
“When you came to me and explained your worries of Tabris, I understood them far
better than you realized. Tabris threatened Ryson and Tabris is a very powerful sorceress.
The magic she controls is an aberration to you. It was as if your worst fears were coming
to life. Now I knew that Ryson could not be truly hurt by Tabris, but because of your
fears, you could not accept that. As I have said before, by warning Tabris I did not
interfere in any way in what might come to pass. All I did was assist you in facing
something you did not have the ability to face on your own.”
Linda stared at the ground. She did not look up when she asked the question she now
very much needed an answer to.
“How do you know that Tabris can’t hurt Ryson? How do you really know that?”
Enin almost cursed. In the end, he decided to reveal what he knew. “The magic allows
me to see the destinies of others. I often see what people must face in the future. I am
aware that Ryson must face another great challenge. He can not avoid it. It must happen.
Because of that, I can predict that nothing will prevent him from facing that challenge.
Tabris understood this as well when I told her that. If she indeed had any plans to seek
out Ryson, they died at that moment because she knew it would be a waste of her time
and effort. Do you see? I didn’t interfere. I didn’t sway anyone’s choice. I simply told her
what was obvious to me.”
Linda appeared to accept this at face value, but then asked the obvious question.
“What is this challenge Ryson has to face?”
Enin turned stoic, his voice flat with simple determination. “That is something I can
not reveal to you, at least not now. I was not against warning Tabris for you for all the
reasons I explained, but I can not begin revealing things without considering all the
consequences that might follow. Anything I say might change your outlook, or Ryson’s,
and that would indeed be interfering. It is not my place to simply divulge these things on
a whim, so please do not ask again.”
Linda was certainly not happy with this answer, but for the moment, she did not press
that specific issue. There was, however, more she wanted to know. “Do you see destiny
in all people?”
“Most people, but not all,” Enin stated plainly enough. “I’m not sure why. That’s just
the way it is.”
“Do you see a destiny in me?”
“No, but understand that means very little because of your gift. You are immune to the
magic and thus your destiny might simply be guarded from my sight because the energies
I interact with can not touch your essence. What I believe, however, is that most people
eventually figure out their destiny. They make choices based on who they are, what they
have become, how they have lived their lives, but in the end, we all tend to reach a point
where we have to face something whether we like it or not. At that point, we face our
destiny by dealing with it the best way we know how.”
With this, Enin had finally said something that might not have made complete sense to
Linda, but she was able to take hold of it in her own mind. She seized upon it and made
her own understanding clear. “You’re talking about knowing what we’re supposed to
do,” she stated with renewed confidence. “Sometimes we don’t know what we’re doing
or why we’re doing things, but at some point, certain things become very clear to us. I
don’t need magic to do that. My destiny is to help Ryson. I know that deep inside.”
Enin smiled. “I won’t argue with you on that.”

“I am Ryson Acumen. I am a friend of Jon Folarok and I wish to see him.” With that
one statement and the Sword of Decree in his hand, Ryson, Lief and Holli were allowed
to pass through the streets of Dunop with a full dwarf escort. He held the weapon low at
his hip with the tip pointed to the ground. The blade magnified the light that was reflected
into this deep underground city through an elaborate configuration of mirrors.
The dwarfs they passed eyed the elves suspiciously but most bowed their heads
slightly in acknowledgement to the delver. There was no clamor of hostility, there were
no shouts of rage. Tensions were noticeably reduced since the last time Ryson and Lief
walked upon the roads of Dunop.
The delver and two elves remained calm as they traveled the impressive underground
tunnels through the city of Dunop. Even though Ryson had seen these vast caves before,
he still marveled at the impressive dwarf architecture. The most amazing structure of all
was the grand palace that stood at the heart of Dunop. It’s cascading, spiraling towers
stretched from the lowest visible bowels to the highest points of the rock ceiling
overhead. They stood like mammoth pillars that supported the entire weight of the land
that rested above this city of engineering audacity.
As the three visitors were escorted into the palace, Ryson recalled the layout of these
halls and realized they were being brought directly to the throne room. He wondered if he
would be greeted by Jon Folarok, he wondered if Jon had perhaps recovered from his
state of utter withdrawal, but all such speculations ended when he spied a dwarf woman
sitting at the head of the room.
The three walked directly up to this woman and briefly bowed their heads in
acknowledgement of the woman’s obvious standing of authority, but none of the three
recognized her.
Surprisingly, the woman smiled upon them all.
“Welcome my friends,” she said in a deep, thick voice. There was sincerity in her
words, that much was clear. The easy stance of her short, stout body gave every
indication that she held no animosity to any of those that entered. She sat relaxed and
waved her arm toward the delver with open enthusiasm. “A grateful salutation to you,
Delver Acumen. You are always free to enter Dunop for its people know you as
honorable. I am Therese Folarok, Queen of Dunop.”
Ryson appeared very much bewildered, but tried to speak through his confusion.
“Thank you, uhmm, please don’t take this the wrong way, but I didn’t think there was
another Folarok to take the throne. When I left, it was just Jon, and he was not in the best
of conditions.”
A brief hint of sadness washed across the dwarf queen’s otherwise animated face.
“Unfortunately, Jon’s condition has not changed since your last visit. He remains very
much within himself. He will not talk to anyone and shows little regard for anything that
goes on around him. As for there not being another Folarok, that was true then, but no
longer true now. My great grandfather married the niece of a Folarok prince. Although I
did not carry the name, I have always carried the blood. In order to bring stability to
Dunop, it was conceived that I should marry Jon Folarok to take the name as well.
Though Jon is still king and the acknowledged ruler of Dunop, I am accepted as the
leader.”
Lief kept his own tone respectful, but he could not refrain from asking the question
that burned his own mind. “And do the dwarves of Dunop accept your authority?”
“There is no challenge to my role,” Therese stated as a matter of fact. “Dunop has
much to recover from, and the mistakes of Yave and those that wished to destroy the
monarchy have received the appropriate blame.”
“That’s good to hear,” Ryson stated with a sense of relief. Then his mind turned over
the series of events described by this new queen and a curious question popped into his
mind. “I don’t mean to pry into your affairs, but I am confused. Jon wasn’t married when
I left and he was in no condition to do much of anything. If he’s still withdrawn from
everything, how was it possible for you to marry him?”
Therese showed no sign of holding back, no desire to try and hide the circumstances
of her partnering to Jon. “Jon was able to walk with only slight assistance to the sacred
alter of Krajkar which is the required setting for royal weddings. While he did not speak,
he was able to nod at appropriate times. I believe he understood exactly what was going
on and welcomed the situation. Since the ceremony, he has shown very slight signs of
recovery. He still has a long way to go, but somehow I think he knows a great burden has
been lifted from him.”
“And put on you,” Ryson offered.
“Fah, I was aware of that burden when I was approached by those loyal to the Folarok
name. Times were, and remain, very difficult. We lost many dwarves due to Yave’s
misguided intentions. The sand giants caused great damage to Dunop before the Cliff
behemoths arrived, and we lost an entire section of Dunop due to the shadow trees.”
Therese would not look upon Lief or Holli, but she did bow her head to Ryson. “We
would have lost the whole city had it not been for you. For that, I and all of Dunop wish
to thank you.”
“There were many mistakes made during that time, by many different people,” Ryson
offered. “I just did what needed to be done.”
“We are still grateful.”
Ryson nodded and then decided it was an appropriate time to come to the point of his
meeting. “Actually, I’m glad you’re grateful because I’m here now for your help.”
“And what does the Delver Acumen need?” Therese asked without hesitation.
“The human city of Connel has been overrun by a goblin horde. Actually, overrun
isn’t the best word. The city was surrounded and forced to surrender.”
“Truly? The goblins surrounded the city? They were able to amass such a number?
The vermin normally do nothing but bicker among themselves.”
“They did not act on their own,” Ryson acknowledged. “They were led by a serp
named Sazar. He brought them together and he coordinated the attack. It is by his will
they control Connel and he aims to grow stronger.”
“Fah, I know of this one named Sazar.” Therese nearly spat upon the ground, but she
remembered where she was and swallowed hard instead. “He is the scoundrel that slunk
into our city and stole what his miserable hands could carry. I have made it my business
to know what lowly creature took advantage of our misfortune. I was not surprised to
learn it was a despicable serp.”
“He is despicable, and now he’s dangerous as well,” Ryson said. “With Connel in his
hands, he now threatens the entire region. We can’t have that. We also can’t let him keep
the prisoners he has in the city. This is where I need the assistance of the dwarfs of
Dunop.”
Ryson paused only for a moment and decided not to try and dance around the subject.
“When Yave ordered Dunop to attack Connel, tunnels were used to allow the dwarf
warriors to enter the center of the city. While we know sections of these tunnels have
been collapsed to prevent humans access to Dunop, we still hope to make use of them.
“Our main objective is to free the human captives. This will isolate Sazar and his dark
creatures. The prisoners are held in the center of the city and Sazar’s minions control the
outskirts. There is no access to the city above ground that is not blocked. If, however, we
can reopen the tunnels, the three of us here hope to guide the prisoners out of the city
through the underground passages.
“Right at this moment, the human guard of Burbon is joining forces with others in the
east. They will attack the outskirts of the city while we manage the escape. What we need
from you is permission to use the tunnels for our plans, and we need your dwarves to
clear the blocked areas so that we can utilize them. We are not asking for anything else.”
This time Therese did hesitate in answering. She took long moments to consider the
proposal and during her reflections, she asked small pointed questions.
“Will anyone else accompany the three of you to go from here to Connel?”
“No, it will just be the three of us,” Ryson replied. “We need to move fast and not
draw great attention.”
“At what time of day will the evacuation start?”
“Right at nightfall.”
“How long will it take?”
“Probably the entire night. I’m not sure exactly how many people are trapped in
Connel, but it has to number in the thousands.”
“How many days until this counter-assault by the human forces on Connel is planned
to begin?”
“It’s also going to begin at nightfall, five days from now.”
Therese seemed in absolute acceptance of the request and willing to assist the delver,
but she did place a restriction on the evacuation. “I have no problem whatsoever in
granting your request other than making one condition. You may use the tunnels to
evacuate the humans of Connel, but you can not bring them into the city of Dunop.
Understand, Delver Acumen, that I request this out of respect for the dwarves of this city.
What occurred during Yave’s unlawful rule was not the true will of Dunop or the
majority of the dwarves themselves. Still, dwarves of this city attacked Connel. We
attacked unsuspecting soldiers and citizens alike out of hate and prejudice. Many realize
this now and they know shame. I can not have that shame deepened by parading the
victims of that city through these streets.”
“I understand,” Ryson responded. “In truth, I don’t need you to offer them sanctuary
here in Dunop, just passage through the tunnels so they can escape the city.”
“I am grateful for your understanding,” Therese said. “These humans from Connel,
they can go anywhere the tunnels allow, do you have a preference?”
Ryson thought for a moment. “Yes, if we can send them east of Connel further into
the plains that would probably be the best alternative, the safest.”
“Our tunnels do not extend very far in that direction. That is the prairie land and
controlled by the humans. There is very little of interest to us there and we have only a
few passages beyond Connel’s eastern borders. Those we have do not extend very far.”
“Do they extend out of sight of Connel?”
“A dwarf’s sight, a human’s sight, an elf’s sight, or a delver’s sight?” asked the dwarf
queen.
“How about the sight of a hook hawk flying directly above Connel?”
“Yes, they extend that far.”
“Then that would be enough.” Ryson then addressed the timing of what was needed to
be done. “How long will it take a contingent of dwarves to reach the areas that were
collapsed to seal off the tunnels to Connel?”
“A day, perhaps two.”
“And to clear them?”
“Another day.”
“That’s better than I could have hoped,” Ryson said with a smile. “The sooner we can
start the better.”
“Then we shall start immediately,” Therese waved over a guard and issued some
immediate orders. When he left with haste, she turned her attention back to Ryson. “I
shall have you and your two friends escorted to the Connel tunnels right now. You will
be given maps of the corridors so that you know which tunnels to utilize under Connel
and then which to use to evacuate the citizens of Connel to the east. Since you will be in
the corridors for at least 5 days, we will provide you provisions to last several days as you
wait for the proper time to enter Connel.
“A team of excavators will accompany you to the points where the tunnels were
collapsed. As I said before, it should only take them a day to make clear passage. A small
contingent of dwarf guards will also accompany you to these points, but not beyond.
They will simply ensure that no creatures use the free passage to attack Dunop. We
allowed that to happen when Sazar looted us the first time. I can not let it happen again.”
“I understand.”
“The dwarf guards will not accompany you into Connel. For that, you must go alone,
but rest assured the path will be obvious to you. You will not get lost in the tunnels.”
“That’s all I can ask for.”
“Then let us begin.”
Queen Therese called for an assistant to escort the three to the tunnels and provide
them with everything they needed. She thanked Ryson again as he and the two elves left
the throne room.
With the visitors now gone, Therese walked over to a table with the stride of
determined purpose. She threw herself in a heavy wooden chair and grabbed writing
materials that were placed neatly about the table top. She stared at blank parchment long
enough to organize the words in her mind. When she started writing, her hand moved
with flowing continuity. She never paused, and once finished she raised herself up from
her chair and walked over to her military advisor with the same resolve.
“I want you to prepare what’s left of our assault forces for immediate action. I also
want every member of the palace guard to make ready for battle.”
“May I ask why?”
“I see… an opportunity,” Therese explained. She handed the parchment she completed
to her advisor. “This will explain it better.”
The advisor quickly scanned the paper in his hands. He looked up at the queen with a
question. “Do you think many will join us?”
“I do, actually,” the queen replied. “But this time the dwarves of Dunop must
willingly choose to join in this attack. I do not wish to order them or threaten them like
Yave did. This time Dunop must act as one without excuses and without any blame to
place on any one individual.”
“I hope you are right,” the advisor remarked with a dubious tone.
Therese pointed to the parchment. “Please have the scribes make copies and post them
throughout the city once the elves and delver have moved into the tunnels to Connel. I
don’t want them reading this.”
“It will be as you wish.”

The trip through the Lacobian desert was as harsh as the surrounding lands. Reader
Matthew and the other ten humans forced from Connel’s Church of Godson faced a
painful journey. They were given little rest, less to eat, and only enough water to keep
them alive. The goblins that pressed them onward were tasked with moving them as fast
as possible to Tabris’ oasis without having any die. Beyond that one condition, the
goblins could care less if the trek was painful beyond comprehension. A suppressive dry
heat nearly roasted their skin during the day and a biting hollow cold left them shivering
in the dark of night.
It was at night, however, that the reader and his followers found the strength to go on.
In this dark place, they saw stars they had never seen before. The sky stretched out before
them and even in the empty coldness, they beheld a beauty that the goblins that pushed
them or the sorceress that waited for them could not dampen. It was almost as if they
could see into the very heavens where they believed Godson awaited them. In truth, many
of them understood a glorious message of hope in these stars. In the vast nothingness, the
dark emptiness, the stars glowed white and painted the sky with an undying belief that
something so vast would contain so much more for them than an empty ending in this
barren place. The desert tested their bodies, but it also strengthened their faith. That faith
would serve them well once they reached their destination.
The oasis was pleasant to the eye and afforded much more agreeable conditions than
the surrounding desert, but in truth, it did more to offend the followers of Godson than
offer any form of relief. They understood that such a haven was not a gift out of the
goodness of Godson, but a phantom sanctuary created by the will of a sorceress. They
found the place repugnant, a twisting of the natural order of Godson’s will.
Tabris met the members of Godson’s church with indifference to them as a group but
keen interest toward their individual traits. She seemed totally apathetic toward the
struggles of their journey, offered them no solace. The only time she truly displayed any
emotion was when she was informed that the one named Matthew was to be kept alive to
watch Tabris test her powers on the other humans. She could only use him when all the
other members of his church were extinguished.
“Which one of you is Matthew?” Tabris demanded.
“I am,” Matthew said simply.
“Why is it that I’m now inconvenienced in having to keep you alive?”
“It’s not by my request,” Matthew answered.
Tabris seethed. “Making me angrier is not going to help you or your friends.”
Matthew knew what he was about to attempt was pointless, but he tried to reach the
woman before him anyway. It was as much an attempt to save her as it was an attempt to
save those members of his church, and thus he had to try. “Don’t you remember me,
Lauren? That was your name when you went into Sanctum Mountain, only after you left
did you take the name Tabris.”
The sorceress stood silent, staring at the man before her with a mix of swirling
emotions.
“I’m the Reader Matthew. I was at the Church of Godson when Stephen Clarin
brought you to us. You remember Stephen, he was killed by Ingar.”
Tabris continued to display only indifference even as she now clearly remembered the
reader. “The Reader Matthew, yes I remember you. You had both legs back then. What
happened to you?”
“I had the misfortune of meeting a dwarf axe with my thigh.”
“It seems your misfortunes continue.”
“Will you let them continue, Lauren?”
“My name is no longer Lauren, it is now Tabris. If this is some attempt to try and
sway me to offering you mercy, don’t you think it would be best not to annoy me?”
“Very well, Tabris. If you remember me, you must also remember Stephen. He
brought you to us when we needed you, when the whole of Uton needed you. He had
great faith in you.”
Tabris shrugged. “He also died foolishly. As for my assistance at Sanctum, I now
realize that it was necessary for me to become who I am. Had I not joined those fools, the
sphere would have killed us all. Still, it is a shame such an artifact had to be destroyed.
Knowing what I know now, I wonder if the sphere could have been altered in a way that
it would not poison the land. Imagine what power I could possess if I controlled all the
magical energy inside the sphere.”
“When you first went to Sanctum,” the reader reminded the sorceress, “it wasn’t about
power. Stephen brought you there to save Uton, not control it.”
Tabris shrugged again. “Yes, well that was then and this is now. And now I’m
learning to control the magic that is free. That is why you and your friends are here.
There are spells I need to test. I wish to experiment in different ways of shaping the
magic. There is only so much you can do with empty sand or snakes and scorpions. The
spells I have in mind require more complexity and thus require more complex subjects.
Living beings can be mixed with the magic in different ways. The magic can be used to
harm or kill them, but it can also be used to change them. Twisting and shaping the
energy in different ways will mean different changes. Unfortunately, until I really
understand how the spell will affect an individual, I won’t be able to cast anything safely.
That is why you are all here.”
Matthew considered the horrifying truth just revealed to him. The people of his church
would face an unknown and potentially agonizing death as this sorceress treated them as
nothing more than meaningless test subjects. He could not bring himself to imagine what
sort of painful transformations the magical spells would have on their bodies. Hoping to
stave off such a fate, he did his best to reach her once more.
“When I first met you, it was obvious you were scared of what you were becoming.
Stephen found you and you trusted him. Do you remember that trust? He would not
believe that you would hurt these people here. In fact, he knew you had great power and
that you could use it to help people. You helped get everyone through the human tier of
Sanctum. Remember what you were! Remember how you helped Ryson and the others!”
At the name of the delver, the sorceress bristled and finally emotion found her voice.
She nearly trembled with anger.
“I remember the delver well. You wish to remind me of what I was? I remember it
clearly. I did not ask for this power. I tried to stop it, but your friend the delver would not
allow it. He forced me to become what I am.”
She felt the desire to cast a spell of lightning and obliterate the reader where he stood,
but then she brought her emotions under control. “I see now why you must watch while I
practice my craft. You must learn what the magic can do, what I can do. Let me show
you now.”
Tabris pointed indiscriminately at a man that stood with the other believers of Godson.
She ordered those goblins that had escorted the group to separate him and place him just
outside the border of the oasis but still in clear sight and within earshot of her own voice.
She bade the goblins to leave him and move out of the way. Then, she called to the man
in an almost lifeless voice.
“What is your name?”
“Avery,” the man replied without moving. He stood still and watched the sorceress
intently. It was obvious that fear began to creep into his mind, but he held his ground and
remained standing. He made no attempt to flee. He waited with his feet on the gritty hard
surface of broken rock, feeling the desert heat all around him. Only brief waves of cool
air flowed into his face from the oasis before him.
“Avery, there is a spell I’ve been working on for days now. I can harness the energy of
a storm. That is now child’s play. It is a simple feat to bring the necessary elements
together to create a tempest of any quality. I have also already been successful in
combining the essence of an individual with the power of a storm. In truth, that was also
fairly simple. It was just a matter of transference. Build up the energy of the storm and
then meld it to the inner energy of the individual. The problem is that in that scenario the
physical body is lost to the greater power of the storm. I wish to accomplish more of the
reverse. I want to capture the power of storm and maintain the body of the individual. Do
you understand?”
Avery did not answer.
“Well, it doesn’t matter if you understand or not. What I’m going to do is try and give
your body the force of a storm as opposed to giving a storm the essence of your being.
The first thing I’m going to try is a wind spin. It’s basically a small tornado. I will focus
on the bottom half of your body. Your head and arms will remain untouched, but
everything below your waist will begin to spin just like a miniature tornado.”
“You should not do this,” Matthew pleaded. “It is wrong!”
“Be quiet,” Tabris commanded but never looked at the reader. She instructed the
goblins to take hold of Matthew and to watch the others to make sure they did not
interfere. She returned her attention to Avery.
“Try to stay conscious as long as possible. I’m afraid there’s not going to be much left
of you when the spell is over. I will work on that once I get the right configuration of the
spell. You see, eventually I might even like to cast this spell on myself when I have it
under full control. I envision myself crossing the desert at much greater speeds when I
can actually combine myself with something like a hurricane wind. Of course, I can only
do this when I’m sure I won’t destroy myself in the process. Thus, I have to practice.”
Tabris now did turn to the reader. “Anything you wish to say to Avery before I cast
my spell?”
Matthew only glared back at Tabris for a moment, then he turned his full attention to
Avery. “What she does will not last for long and then you will be with Godson forever.
Hold to that thought, and keep your faith.”
Avery heard these words and actually smiled.
Tabris shook her head at the display. She concentrated deeply on the man standing in
the desert and then pulled her hands together and closed them toward her chest. She
muttered a few words as she mingled thoughts of spell fragments in her mind. In image
of what she hoped to construct took shape in her thoughts as a violet diamond of energy
appeared at her breast. Her hand took hold of the magical shape and she threw her arms
forward toward Avery. The purple magic flew from her and exploded about the man’s
legs.
Avery gritted his teeth and bit back a scream for as long as he could, but as his legs
began to fling wildly in the air, he could hold back no more. He yelled in great pain as the
bottom half of his body disappeared into a swirling mass of sand and debris. His legs
were no longer visible to those that witnessed this atrocity. The upper half of his body
appeared to be centered upon a spinning top, a tiny tornado that remained in place.
The screaming continued for long drawn out moments until Avery’s head went limp
and drooped over his shoulders. His arms also fell lifeless down the sides of his torso. His
hands bobbed about as his fingers fell into the swirling mass that consumed his lower
body. Very soon after he lost consciousness, the spinning ceased and the remnants of his
legs collapsed into a mound of twisted flesh and muscle as well as splintered bone. The
upper half of Avery’s body crashed into the sandy rock of the desert. He was dead.
“I have learned much from this,” Tabris noted, completely disregarding the remains of
Avery’s body. “I believe my deal with Sazar will indeed be a bargain for me.” She then
turned to Matthew with apparently great interest. “What have you learned, reader?”
At first, Matthew did not wish to answer, but then found the strength to offer his own
opinion of what just happened. “I’ve learned that faith is stronger than magic.”
The statement momentarily caught the sorceress off guard, but she found her anger
again quickly. “If that is so, why don’t you use your faith to defeat me now?”
Matthew did not move.
Tabris continued to taunt him. “If your faith is so strong, stop me and save these
others that depend on you. Save those that will be coming in the future.”
Matthew looked to the ground. “It seems their faith is stronger than mine.”
Tabris laughed and called for another follower of Godson.

Ryson kept track of the passing days by monitoring the change in light in the tunnels.
Dwarves used thin, tubular channels that rose to the surface throughout their matrix of
catacombs, corridors and tunnels to bring air to their underground passages as well as
sunlight. While even during the height of day, the corridors would be considered dark by
most humans, the delver, elves and dwarves could see easily in the diminished light.
When night fell, the passages turned eerily dark and Ryson often pulled out the Sword of
Decree to magnify the starlight. He didn’t need it to see, but at least the light chased away
the strangling darkness that consumed these tunnels.
As the dwarves finished clearing the last blockades of the corridors that led to Connel,
Holli considered the darkness as a possible hindrance to their plans.
“When we direct the humans down here, they’re not going to be able to see. It’s going
to be well after sunset when the evacuation should begin. There are thousands of humans
that need to be evacuated, that’s going to take the entire night. That means they are going
to be in the caves, even during the greatest darkness of midnight. There will be much
going on above them and asking them exit through such a dark passage is to invite
panic.”
Ryson sheathed his sword and examined the dim light of the tunnels.
“You’re right,” Ryson agreed. “They’re not going to like what’s happening as it is and
if it’s this dark, many will probably panic. I could stay in the tunnels and help direct
them. With my sword unsheathed that would give more than enough light. Anyway, we
need someone down here to guide these people to the right caves.”
“That task should fall to me,” Holli stated. “You know Connel far better than I do.
You also have speed I can’t hope to match. Connel’s center is large and we have to
assume the people are spread out. You must be on the surface to spread the word of the
escape plan. Lief also must go as he has the best knowledge of the city’s situation directly
after the goblins took over.”
Ryson considered the point and he could not argue. “Would you argue with taking my
sword? I’m not going to want to draw attention to myself when I’m out in the open, so
I’m not going to be using it. Seems to me it would serve a better purpose down here.”
“The idea has merit, but I don’t like the idea of you going unarmed up into the city.”
At this point, a dwarf in charge of the excavating moved forward to the elves and
delver.
“Do not concern yourselves with the lack of light,” the dwarf stated gruffly. “We have
anticipated such a problem and already have the answer. We have brought several light
gems that we will setup in but a few moments. These tunnels are constructed to direct the
light forward and redirect it down many shafts. Based on how we station the gems, we
can send the light all the way to Connel as well as to the far eastern end of the corridors
which will be your final destination.”
Ryson nodded, but then for the first time began considering other potential problems
he did not think of before. He questioned the dwarf further on what to expect.
“The tunnels that we plan on using that go eastward beyond Connel, how will we exit?
Is the tunnel open at the end? If so, where will the people end up when they come back
out on the surface?”
“It is open,” the dwarf replied. “It breaks into a dry stream bed. If it were the start of
the growing season, it would be half filled with water. At this time, the waterways that
feed it run low before the snow melt. The humans leave it alone since it floods during
their planting season. For your purposes, it should be fine. Once your people are in the
open, they will be in the prairie lands east of Connel, not very far from several farm
outposts.”
Ryson nodded happily, then he thought of his own needs.
“What about getting from the tunnel up into Connel? The people of Connel had to fill
in the outlets by now. I’m sure they didn’t just leave open holes all over the place.”
“They probably have, but not all. We created many access points, some of which lead
to the sub-basements of older buildings. We kept these exit points hidden so that we
could move in and out of the tunnels without being seen. They are marked on your map.”
“That’s actually going to work in our favor,” Ryson remarked as he considered what
he was told. “We can guide people to these points and they can escape under cover as
opposed to dropping into the ground in plain site. Even if the serp and the other dark
creatures are occupied with Sy’s attack, one of them is bound to notice lines of people
dropping into the ground in the middle of some road.”
Lief had opened the map and was already reviewing certain sections. “This will hasten
our work. We will not have to guide the humans directly to the openings. We can direct
them to these buildings here, here and here,” he said as he pointed to the map. “They can
enter the tunnels themselves and Holli can direct them down the proper passage to the
east. With luck, we may be able to pull this off. The most difficult part is going to be
spreading the word and keeping the humans from making a panicked escape.”
The dwarf turned about. “The clearing is nearly complete. In but a few moments, we
will set the light gems. Your paths will be clear to you. Simply follow the direction of the
light.” The dwarf kept moving but he pointed his arm out to his right side. “Remember
that direction is north. These tunnels do not curve. They are built in straight lines. Turns
will be obvious, so keep your point of reference about you and you will always know
which way is east.”
“Looks like we get moving,” Ryson said as he gathered up their supplies.

Sy rode side-by-side with Colonel Haravin the commander of Fort Nebran. Haravin
had already heard what happened to Connel from the cavalry that reached the fort days
earlier. He needed little convincing to assist Sy in his plans. In less than two days, they
combined their forces with every outpost in the region.
The entire militia rode upon horseback as it set out for Connel. For the most part, the
eastern farmlands were flat, wide open plains which allowed for the battalion to stretch
across the horizon. They moved in unison, a long unbroken line, several horses deep.
They carried spears and bows and mulled over the coming battle. Those that belonged to
Connel’s cavalry took the lead. They vowed to free the city or die.
Sy looked over the impressive array of men, horses, and weapons. “He’s going to see
us coming, no reason to hide. Might as well let him see our numbers and give him
something to think about.”
The colonel grunted. “He won’t need scouts, either. From every report I have, he’s got
those blasted hook hawks circling the city. With those foul creatures in the air, he’s going
to see us before we see them.”
“If you were Sazar, what would you do?” Sy asked.
The colonel didn’t need time to answer. “I’d stay put. He knows we didn’t come out
here to just free the farmlands or retake supplies outside the city. With this many men,
our mission is pretty clear. We’re going to attack. Now from what I’ve heard from
Connel’s cavalry, he has thousands of goblins in that city. They’re armed with crossbows.
If I were in charge of that force—keep them in position, that’s what I’d do. If he comes
out to meet us in the open field, he gives up the advantage. He may be a bastard of a serp,
but he’s not dumb. We need to give him the credit he’s due. I would bet the 4th regiment
he’s going to force us to come to him.”
“So we’re going to have to face him in Connel’s streets.”
The colonel had already accepted that as fact. “Indeed, and that’s not going to be
easy.”
“Well, it might not be easy, but if you’re right, and I’m sure you are, we can make
time work for our advantage. From what Lief told me, he’s going to be having the
farmers work the fields. We can start by freeing them first. We hit any goblin packs
guarding the farms hard. We can do that while it’s still light. Once we have the farms
secure, we do what he did. We surround the city. Hopefully, we can make him sweat a
bit. Let’s focus on our strengths.”
“Aye, that’s never a bad idea,” the colonel replied as he clicked on his mount.

“It’s got to be around noon,” Ryson said as he inspected the light coming through the
cave and calculated the time in his head. “Sy’s forces should already be advancing on the
city. They’re going to hit tonight.”
Holli reviewed one of the maps given to them by the dwarves. She looked down one
tunnel that led to the east and then up another that followed directly under Connel toward
its center.
“Those that will be evacuating will be coming down this tunnel and they will have to
turn here. This will send them to the east. According to the map, this tunnel goes due east
right to the exit point. Once they’re moving in this direction, they can’t get lost and will
have no problem getting out. That makes things much easier. We just have to make sure
they make this turn.”
Ryson looked about the rock walls that made up these elaborate caves. He pulled the
Sword of Decree and pressed its point into the stone. On the opening to the eastern
passageway, he wrote the words ‘Exit this Way, Go to End!’ and an arrow pointing in the
proper direction. On the wall that led back toward Dunop he carved ‘Do Not Enter,
Danger!’ The sword left deep etchings that were clear for everyone to read.
Holli grabbed several stones and with them created a large arrow on the stone floor off
to the side that pointed in the right direction. “Yours is better, but another sign won’t
hurt. It will also probably get scattered as more travel this way, but once we get the
people moving in the right direction, they will simply follow each other.”
Looking back toward Connel, Holli considered the task ahead of them. She then took
another glance at the map that revealed the locations of hidden entrance points into
Connel. “Assuming the humans never discovered these two passages, I would suggest
that Ryson take this one and Lief you take that one.”
She pointed to the two corridors as Lief and Ryson stood by her side. “Ryson, yours
should come up several blocks northwest of the city center and Lief’s will provide access
more to the southeast. You will be several blocks apart and can thus cover more of the
city. If you both move clockwise for a half circle and then turn inward and move
counterclockwise you will not end up covering the same ground.”
“Works for me,” Ryson agreed.
“I will be waiting for them very near these passageways,” Holli continued. “I will
move back and forth to each as fast as I can. Tell the first few that you send to wait for
my instructions once they are inside the tunnels. After that, simply tell the rest to follow
those that have gone down before them. We should be able to create a constant flow. That
will, in fact, be the only way we can get most of the people out by sunrise anyway. May I
suggest that you take care in the first people you contact. It is important that they are
capable and of strong will. I will most likely choose several of the more competent to
assist in offering instructions to those that start moving down the tunnels. If any show
panic up on the streets, do not approach them until much later. We can’t afford panic in
the tunnels, especially in the beginning.”
“What of those that do not wish to leave?” Lief asked
“Move on and let them stay where they are,” Holli responded firmly.
Ryson was about to argue and Holli sensed it before he spoke a word. “Ryson, we
don’t have time to try and convince these people what is best for them. By doing that,
you risk the lives of others that are willing to leave. It is not fair to them. If there is time,
we can return later, but we deal with that situation after we get as many as we can to
safety.”
Ryson didn’t like how that sounded, but deep in his heart, he knew she was right.
“Once the evacuation is progressing and I am confident in the people I have assisting
in the tunnels, I will also come to the surface. I will use this passage.” She pointed to a
spot at the center of the map. “While you two work inward, I can work from the center
out. When we meet, we can then move to points closer to the outer edges of the city. This
will be the most dangerous areas and at that point we should move together.”
Ryson heaved a heavy sigh. “I guess that covers everything. We should probably start
moving to our positions under the city. We’ll have to separate and be ready to surface
when we hear Sy attack the outskirts of the city.”

It was late afternoon six days after Sy Fenden left for Fort Nebran when the full force
of Nebran’s extended cavalry struck the outlying farms within sight of Connel. Small
bands of goblins patrolled the outer fields. As they turned to the east to view what
sounded like thunder, they beheld a large dark mass low on the horizon. It stretched
across the hilly fields and extended beyond their sight. One thing was very clear, it was
moving fast and moving directly toward them.
The echoing thunder grew in intensity and soon it became clear that this storm was the
force of soldiers on horseback. The rhythmic galloping of the horses pounded fear into
the black hearts of those goblins unfortunate enough to be patrolling the far eastern limits
of Connel’s farmlands. Knowing there was no possible way to outrun or outflank the
angry mass of soldiers that rushed toward them like a flood during the great thaw, most
goblins dropped to the ground in balled up heaps hoping to somehow miraculously avoid
the fate before them. Miracles, however, would not belong to these goblins on this day.
They were saved for others more deserving, and these creatures had earned their death.
If it wasn’t the tip of the spear that skewered them, it was a mighty hoof that trampled
them. Death was sudden and instant, the goblins unable to even scream for mercy. Every
goblin in the field that could not retreat to Connel’s safer borders was annihilated in that
massive, angry rush.
The soldiers made no shouts of joy, no cries of victory. They knew this was only the
first and easiest part of their task ahead. Instead they wore grim expressions of
determination, blinking back the wind, dust, and debris that battered their faces as they
rushed onward with Connel clear in their sights.
In Connel’s north side within a large elegant home, Chal stumbled into his master’s
quarters. He moved hesitantly to the serp that stood near a window that faced west. Chal
stole a quick glimpse out that window and could only see the fading red and orange of a
brilliant sunset as the sun dropped below the peaks of the vast western mountain ranges.
“I’m quite aware of the attack from the east,” Sazar stated before his lackey could
speak. “Do not look so concerned.”
“But there is a great number,” Chal blurted out.
“Of course there is, did you think they would return with five soldiers in a wagon
drawn but a three-legged horse? I can see what the hook hawks see, never forget that,
thus I know their numbers. None of this is unexpected, actually. When I allowed the
cavalry to flee to the east, I knew this was a distinct possibility. Why do you think my
first act was to have the supplies in the farms moved into the city? The humans don’t
want us here and they’re going to try and make us leave, but I have no intention of
leaving.”
Even in the face of Sazar’s calm, Chal could not contain his growing apprehension.
“What will happen when they reach the city?”
Sazar sighed. “I assume all goblins are probably reacting like you, that’s why I am
receiving so much fear. Your passions are sometimes very tiring. I supposed it is time to
reassure you all.”
Sazar concentrated deeply and grasped every link within his mind to literally
thousands of goblins within the city and beyond. He sent one blanket message to them
all.
Every goblin outside the city must return at once if possible. Those to the west, flee to
the forest and wait my command. Those inside the city, take your posts behind the webs.
Disregard the number of humans, they can not break through into the city. When they
come within range, fire upon them.
“Does that make you feel better?” Sazar asked.
Chal nodded but Sazar already felt the wave of relief flushing into his mind from
goblins throughout the city, and thus, he knew the answer before Chal replied.
“We have some fortune in this,” Sazar continued to Chal. “We did not send the
humans to the mines today and so every shag is here in the city as opposed to guarding
miners in the hills. I am impressed with the contingent of soldiers the humans raised, but
it will not avail them. The shags will guard the few unblocked entrances into the city and
the humans will not be able to enter. It is surprising, however, that their timing is so poor.
The sun sets and the darkness is ours, not theirs. Still…”
Sazar stopped in the middle of his thought. He said nothing further as he grasped
tightly to the links of several special minions. He opened his being to their senses and
took hold of new knowledge.
“Something is below the city,” Sazar stated with an angry edge to his voice.

Sy could see the goblins closer to the city scrambling toward the structures that made
up the outer edges of Connel. They darted quickly out of sight, and at that distance, he
could not make out where they entered the city. Still, he watched intently waiting for any
sign of the enemy creatures, wondering if they would rush out of the city to repel them.
He saw nothing to indicate such a strategy.
Sy yelled to Colonel Haravin as they raced closer toward Connel. “They’re doing
exactly what you said they would! They’re staying put, they’re not going to meet us out
here. They’re going to stick to their positions. Shame, we would have decimated them.”
“Aye, I think the bastard serp figured that out when he saw us. Regardless, our initial
attack has been successful. It is time to institute the next phase.” With that, the colonel
raised his hand with two fingers held upward.
A rider to Haravin’s left raised a green and white flag. As he did, the long line of
galloping horses broke at the center. More and more horses dropped back away from the
middle of the line, increasing the size of the gap. As these horses moved away both to the
right and the left in an angled direction, the once unbroken line began to form two
separate and distinct V-shaped formations that pointed at each other. These formations
began to spread apart even further as the soldiers closed on Connel. The break between
the two formations widened to the point that the whole of Connel could fit through the
gap. As the riders continued forward, one formation moved to the north of the city and
the other to the south, and neither would come close enough to be in crossbow range of
any goblins waiting at Connel’s edge.
Both Sy and Colonel Harkin remained together at the formation that would cross past
the south of Connel.
“That probably surprised him,” Sy grinned.
“Aye, at the very least, he has something to think about.” With the formation now
passing beyond Connel, the colonel raised three fingers to the flag bearer. “Time to begin
phase three.”
The soldier to the colonel’s left now raised a green and red flag. Those riders that
pulled back and formed the back shaft of the V-formations now raced back to their
original positions to reform one unbroken line.
“Let us now clear the western fields and let the serp wonder if we are bypassing him
to take a flanking position at Pinesway.”
The thundering line of riders romped through the western lands just as they did the
farmlands to the east. They cleared the area of all goblins and even those that had
attempted to reach the trees of the forest were caught by the speeding horses. Before the
last glowing strands of the red and orange sunset died away below the mountains, the
western lands were cleansed of any dark creatures.
The cavalry line slowed and pulled to a halt. After turning completely about, the long
stretch of soldiers on horseback paused for long moments to give their mounts a
momentary rest. They cleaned their weapons, readjusted their armor and checked their
equipment. Connel now stood before them to the east as darkness now came to rest upon
the land.
Sy nodded his head toward the city. “His hook hawks are still in the air. If what I’ve
been told about him is true, he can see whatever the creatures he controls see. That means
he knows we haven’t left.”
“Aye, let’s make it clear we’re not going away.” The colonel then gave an order to his
flag bearer. “A steady trot to the city. Surround it out of crossbow range.”
The soldier replied by first holding a solid green flag that he waved twice toward the
city. He then raised a yellow flag that he twirled about like a pinwheel. The long formed
line of cavalry now moved steadily back toward Connel.

Ryson’s sharp delver hearing picked up the thunderous beat of horse hooves even
from his position well below ground. From the roaring vibrations, he knew that Sy had
succeeded in convincing many to join the assault. He wondered about this awe-inspiring
sight, what that many soldiers on horseback racing to the city must look like. His delver
curiosity almost got the better of him, but he recalled his true mission and buried the
desire to look upon the charge of soldiers. He would ascend through the access tunnel,
but remain focused on leading those trapped in Connel to safety.
As he began to climb toward a new light overhead—a light from an opening that
would lead to the basement of some storehouse in Connel’s northwest section—Ryson
picked up another tremble in the ground, one that did not originate from the distant horses
racing toward Connel. This disturbance rattled the ground very close to him. Half-way up
the access tunnel, he stopped his own movements to better sense what was going on
around him. Moments later and just a few steps ahead, dirt and rock erupted into the
passageway as the black, grime-filled pinchers of a rock beetle burst through the narrow
cave walls.
Ryson jumped back just as the beetle pressed itself out of its own burrowed passage.
As the narrow high-jointed legs twirled the giant insect about to get a new hold of the
access way, Ryson stared in uncertainty at the large rounded body of the monster that
now blocked his path to Connel. When the creature started to propel itself forward in a
rambling motion, the delver backtracked with ease. He kept a safe distance from the thick
pinchers that glistened in the sparkling beams of light that flowed through the lower part
of the cave. Knowing he could not leave this creature alive if he hoped to evacuate people
down this passage, he had little choice but to draw the Sword of Decree.
As the glow of the blade magnified the light in the tunnel, the immense insect
recoiled. Without spinning about, it retraced its own steps backward at an alarmed pace
of frantic motion. Before the delver realized the insect’s intentions, the beetle reached its
own burrowed tunnel and darted out of sight.
Ryson cursed as he deftly raced back up the access way and toward the beetle’s escape
route. The delver peered into the hole and allowed the blade of his sword to enter the new
cavern, filling the passage with brilliant light. Ryson saw three different paths breaking
from the opening and could not fathom which the insect might have taken. Still, he could
not simply allow the creature to escape. It could easily return when people filled this
tunnel. That would be beyond catastrophic. He was about to venture a guess as to the
beetle’s path when he heard Holli shout out.
Ryson cursed again in a moment of indecision. The elf was calling out to him, not in
fear or in panic, but in a tone that demanded his immediate attention. He took one last
glance down into the beetle’s den, shook his head in disgust, and then bounded back
toward Holli.
In but an instant, Ryson saw Holli with her bow drawn. She stood between two rock
beetles. She aimed at the one in front of her. With steady precision, she released the
bowstring and let the arrow fly at the creature’s head. Unfortunately, the insect dropped
its body low against the ground and the shaft shattered against the thick round shell that
covered its massive body.
“There’s another one behind you!” Ryson shouted a warning.
“I’m aware of that,” Holli replied. In the blink of an eye she ran directly at the monster
that she had fired upon. She dove upward and forward, extending her body as high above
the beetle as the cave ceiling would allow.
The large insect lurched up quickly on its two hind legs with its thick pinchers poised
to attack, but its movements were no match for the nimble elf. The pinchers closed on
empty air. The miss left the creature off balance and it toppled forward. It landed on its
legs, however, and it twirled about to face Holli once more.
“Use your blade on the one nearest you,” Holli commanded. “The sword can break
through the armored hide.”
Ryson did not act immediately. Instead, he set his feet below him, taking a deep breath
in preparation for the strike. Almost as if the beetle could sense what was happening
behind it, it rose up on its legs and skittered off to the side. Without looking back, it
dropped low and propelled itself through a hole just wide enough for its body to fit
through.
“Blast!” Holli shouted. “Cut the other one off! Don’t let it reach that tunnel!”
This time Ryson moved swiftly and without delay. He leapt to a clear spot between
the remaining beetle and the passage the other insect used to escape. He held the Sword
of Decree firmly in front of him waiting for the monster to turn. It never did.
Holli drew another arrow, but before she could even place it in the bow string, the
beetle’s six legs thrust it toward her with unexpected speed. She had to drop the arrow as
she leapt to one side of the tunnel and then used her hand against the cave wall to thrust
her further away from the lunging pinchers.
Ryson leapt forward at the creature, but the instant he moved, another pair of pinchers
exploded through the cave wall and nearly closed around his neck. Only his delver speed
saved him as he dropped to the ground and rolled away. Completing the tumble and
leaping back up to his feet, he faced the new attacker with his sword ready to strike, but
the insect’s head withdrew back into the darkness of yet another break in the cave wall.
At that moment, Lief appeared and without hesitation fired his bow at the beetle that
continued to move toward Holli. The arrow sliced through the air and slammed into the
upper joint of the insect’s rear left leg. The leg quivered and then fell limp.
The loss of its hind leg left the beetle unsteady in its movement, but also much more
alarmed. It no longer focused on Holli and instead skittered and skipped about on its
functioning legs, leaving the damaged one to drag along the ground. It flattened itself
against the ground and its forward legs dug furiously against the dirt and rock. Within
moments, half of its body was submerged out of sight.
Ryson stood uncertain as he watched the monster make further progress in burrowing
out of sight. “What do we do?”
“There is little we can do,” Holli offered dejectedly.
Ryson pointed back down from the way he had come. “There was another one that
came at me by the northern passage. It escaped down a path that opens very near the
entrance point we were going to use.”
Holli moved up and quickly inspected several of the holes made by the beetles. “That
means there are at least three, probably more. We have no idea how many. We have to
call off the evacuation.”
“But we can’t…”
Before Ryson could argue further, Holli explained the simple truth. “What we can’t do
is send defenseless people into this cavern. The serp has a connection with these
creatures. Since they know we are here, he knows we are here. Regardless of what is
going on near the outer edges of the city, he is not going to ignore these tunnels any
further. He can use the beetles to attack, or have them collapse the tunnels. Trying to
bring people down here would be the same as sending them to their death.”
“Then what do we do? Getting the people out of there is part of the plan. We have…”
Ryson stopped suddenly and peered down the tunnel toward Dunop. “Wait, there’s more
movement down there, but it’s not beetles.”
Both elves turned their own attention back down the cavernous passage. Their keen elf
vision revealed the truth.
“The dwarves are coming and they are dressed for battle,” Holli stated and quickly
took a position in the center of the tunnel.
Indeed, swarming up through the cavern from Dunop came a great host of dwarves
moving with grim determination. They wore full battle armor and carried mace and axe.
At the front marched the dwarf queen. As she approached the three, she unexpectedly
offered a smile and bid those dwarves behind her to hold their progress. She immediately
acknowledged Ryson.
“Leave the beetles to us, Delver Acumen, and there is no longer a need for your
evacuation.” The queen then raised her left hand, pointed forward, and made four distinct
clicking noises with her tongue. Several groups of dwarves charged further up the tunnel,
disappearing into the various passages used by the rock beetles. The queen then turned
back to the delver. “Be assured the insects will not escape us.”
Ryson looked from Queen Therese to the two elves. Lief was eyeing the dwarf queen
suspiciously while Holli stood stoic. Ryson could read little from her expression. Without
knowing what else to do, he asked the obvious question.
“What are you doing here?”
Therese Folarok actually laughed—a throaty, hearty laugh. After a few breaths, she
finally answered, but in the form of a question. “What do you think we are doing here?”
“I don’t have the slightest idea,” Ryson admitted honestly.
“Your elf friend here believes we are here for no good reasons,” the queen said as she
nodded to Lief. “And that one will not reveal her assumptions. She is well trained. I
would play this game with you longer, but time is short. We have a city to cleanse of dark
creatures and we wish to do it before the sun rises.”
“You’re going to attack the goblins?” Ryson blurted out in obvious surprise.
“Indeed, as well as any other dark creatures that must be removed.”
“But why?”
Here, Therese’s face lost its mirth and her tone turned deadly serious. “It is quite
simple. We have wronged these humans. It is time to make amends for that wrong.”
Therese looked upon the delver and saw only more confusion. She did her best to
make her point clear. “You yourself pointed out these tunnels were created for us to
attack the humans of Connel, and attack them we did. We offered no quarter and allowed
no mercy. We took the lives of many in that battle, many that did not deserve to die. We
did all of this because we wanted to believe they were a threat to us, when in truth we
were the ones creating the threat. These humans had never done anything to us. In truth,
they did not even know Dunop existed until we rose upon their streets for the sole
purpose of trying to prove our own superiority.”
Ryson tried to interject his own understanding. “But Yave…”
The delver was not allowed to continue as Queen Therese cut him off in mid sentence.
“…was not the only one to blame,” Therese said with finality. “Yave was not alone,
and we can’t simply hang this totally on the separatists that aided her for their own cause.
We all have blood on our hands. Dunop has blood on its hands, and it must be cleansed
just as we will cleanse the streets above of the horde that now infests them. You see,
Delver Acumen, sometimes it’s not enough to simply acknowledge you’ve done great
harm. Sometimes you have to do more to rectify those mistakes.”
She paused as she waved her arm behind her to the throng of dwarves that waited in
the tunnel for her orders. “Behind me is nearly every dwarf in Dunop and they are here of
their own volition, not because I ordered them here. So you can understand the weight of
what I say, understand that these dwarves volunteered for this action. They accepted it as
their duty, their responsibility. Once you departed, I posted declarations throughout
Dunop that Connel had been captured by a horde of goblins. I asked for any that wished
to assist the city to appear before the palace gates prepared for battle. This is what
showed up.”
Ryson stared down the tunnel and realized the line of dwarves continued beyond his
sight. It really must have been nearly every citizen of Dunop.
“But we didn’t ask for your help beyond clearing the passage,” Ryson said still
amazed by what he saw.
“Fah, that barely makes up for the extensive damage we caused to the city above us.
In essence, the goblin’s ability to take the city is also our fault. We weakened the
human’s defenses, and thus, it is even more imperative we redeem ourselves. How can
clearing a few tunnels even begin to erase the stains on Dunop’s honor?”
“I don’t think anyone blames Dunop for what happened in the past,” Ryson offered.
“You think not?” The queen shook her head strenuously. “I’m afraid it is not so. We
could try to place the blame on Yave and those misguided dwarves that arrogantly
desired to show dwarf strength at the expense of others. Unfortunately, the attempt would
be in vain. You can not separate the dwarves from the deed, or the deed from the
dwarves. They become one and they encompass all of us, not just a select few. Dunop
will always be known as the city of dwarves that attacked the helpless without true cause.
That is not a legacy we wish to have endure.”
“But things have changed,” Ryson said. “You have new leaders. Yave is gone, those
that followed her appear to be out of power. You can move on.”
“I am grateful for your willingness to forgive, but you are not like many others. Know
this Delver Acumen, you showed us true honor when you saved Dunop from the shadow
trees. You did not have to do this. You were aware the dwarves of Dunop had attacked
humans in Connel. You were aware we were about to attack the town of Burbon. You
were thrown in the dungeon as a reward for trying to stop that madness, and still, you
found it within yourself to put those transgressions aside and save our city. In that
moment, you proved yourself far more worthy of admiration than any dwarf in Dunop.
That is not only a credit to you, it is a credit to those who serve with you, those you call
friend, whether they be elf or human. When we consider what we have done in the face
of such honor, we are humbled.”
Therese’s face suddenly brightened and she spoke with renewed vitality. “But now
you give us an opportunity, a chance to remove the stain on our honor and possibly allow
us to gain your friendship and respect. If so, we can then respect ourselves once more. It
is our intention, all of the dwarves of Dunop, to rid the city above of those despicable
creatures. Now please, I understand your curious nature, but any further questions must
wait. As I said, we wish to complete this task before the sun rises, and I need your
assistance.”
“What do you require?” Holli asked.
The dwarf queen nodded in appreciation to the elf guard. “The evacuation is no longer
necessary since we shall free this city, however, the humans above must be informed of
our intentions. The last time dwarves rose up to the streets of Connel, we did so to attack,
we did so to our shame. The three of you must inform them that we mean them no further
harm. We will dispatch these dark creatures that plague them, and then, we will return
home. While I would understand their apprehension, I do not wish the sight of dwarves
returning to their streets to incite further panic. Understand this, these dwarves that
follow me are under strict orders not to harm a single human, even if we are attacked by
them. You cooperation is most needed in this regard.”
Ryson considered what was said to him, and quickly welcomed the plan. It was
obvious that Connel could no longer simply be evacuated and here before him was the
perfect solution to their problem. Sy and all the soldiers surrounding Connel would face
unparalleled difficulties in pressing the goblins out of the city, but these dwarves were
much better suited for the task.
With the thought of Sy in his mind, the delver paused and listened intently to
everything about him. While he heard the movements of the small dwarf groups pursuing
the rock beetles, he could no longer hear the charging hooves of horses overhead.
“Alright, and thank you. This is more than I can ask, and I’ll do everything I can to
help. From what I can hear, Sy must have his forces in place around the city. The charge
is over. If we’re going to do this, then we need to go now.”
Holli spoke up to the delver. “You and Lief can return to your initial passages you
planned to use before. I will not have to wait here to guide the humans, thus I can take the
center path now.”
Ryson shook his head strenuously. “No, you take my passage. I need to go more to the
southwest. I have to get to the Church of Godson.”

The slow trot of the horses drew to a close. The soldiers of Fort Nebran along with the
cavalry of Connel and the guard of Burbon now surrounded Connel. The edge of the
circle remained well out of crossbow fire from any structure within the city. The soldiers
sat patiently on their mounts in the encroaching dark of early evening. The air grew ever
colder as any faint glow of light completely disappeared behind the gray wall of
mountains to the west.
Colonel Haravin eyed the city and his soldiers that surrounded it as he considered the
next phase of the attack. He spoke to Sy openly of what they had to do.
“I have six squads mopping up both to the west and east and securing those farmlands.
We will not need them in our initial attack, but we now deal with our biggest challenge. I
do not want to risk casualties, but we must make Sazar believe that we are focused on
entering the city and not acting as a diversion.”
“Agreed,” Sy said. “At this point, things have gone better than I would have dared
hope. I’m guessing that Ryson knows we have the city surrounded.”
“How sure are you of this?”
“It’s amazing what that delver can hear. Even below ground, he had to hear the charge
of the horses. Even the elves probably heard that.”
“That is assuming the dwarves did as the delver asked and cleared the tunnels. If they
did not, then the delver and elves may be no where near the city.”
“He would have gotten word to me if he wasn’t there. In fact, he’d probably be right
here now ready to scout the city for the openings.”
“Unless the dwarves threw him in their prison.”
Sy frowned, but then stopped himself. “Can’t think like that.”
The colonel nodded, “You are right. We can’t. We must believe that the evacuation is
about to start, so we should begin with our initial assault plans.” Colonel Haravin turned
to the flag bearer to prepare the next set of signals. “Fore and back, every other solider!”
The aide next to Haravin raised two red flags. He kept the first one still as he thrust the
other forward. He quickly pulled it back and then kept that one still as he waved the first
one forward. He did this several times in quick succession.
Once the signal was called, the soldiers carried out the orders. In the large circle that
surrounded Connel, every other rider urged his mount forward at full speed. Those that
remained stationary prepared their bows and waited for the first rush to conclude. From a
hook hawk’s perspective high in the sky, the original circle now looked more like a
dotted line that lost small segments of its mass as half of the formation members broke
from its ranks. The soldiers that rushed forward now created a second circle which
appeared to be collapsing inward with Connel as its central focal point.
Those that charged forward strung arrows in their bows. In the thickening dark, it was
difficult for them to locate their targets. They had been instructed earlier to first look for
the bloat spiders nestled in the webs that sealed off the city. In some cases the riders
spotted dark masses in the center of a spun web. These made easy targets, but in other
areas, the spiders had moved to dark corners or clung closely to the shadowed walls of
buildings. For these creatures, the soldiers would have to take their best guess and hope at
least some of their arrows might find their mark.
The riders also knew the goblins would be waiting with their crossbows. Again, the
night assisted the defenders for their positions were cloaked in dark and shadow. Still, the
riders knew a barrage of crossbow fire would welcome them the moment they came in
range. At the moment they believed the exchange would occur, they urged their mounts
on faster in hopes of racing beneath the arc of fire. The tactic worked with amazing
success and as the hail of crossbow fire sailed over their heads, the soldiers released their
own arrows.
All around the city, the barrage of shafts split the night air. The bloat spiders centered
in their webs died instantly from numerous impacts. Even those monsters clinging to the
shadows did not escape the accuracy of the first volley. So many arrows littered their
webs that well over three quarters of the bloat spiders were either killed or mortally
wounded. Those that survived were now trapped where they hid. Their webs remained
intact, but the cascade of arrows plunged into the threads made them impassable for the
spiders’ movements.
Those riders making up the first assault turned about and headed back to the outer
circle before the goblins could reload. As they returned to the perimeter, those soldiers
that had held steady now moved forward with hopes of matching the success of the first
attack. Again, a second inner circle formed and tightened about the outskirts of the city.
As this group reached the ground marked by the goblins’ bolts, they prepared for the next
volley of crossbow fire.
The goblins anticipated a similar tactic from this second assault. They believed the
riders would increase their speed to avoid casualties. The diminutive monsters had
lowered their aim in hopes of turning the tactics against the human riders. They fired with
glee, but this soon turned to curses of hate spawned anger.
The second wave of riders did not urge their mounts forward. Instead, they pulled up
their horses to a near halt and allowed the bolts to fall upon the ground before them. They
fired their own arrows into the darkness, letting them rain down on the heads of where
they believed the goblins would be hiding. They quickly turned about and returned to the
circular formation that surrounded the city.
“Call for a hold!” Colonel Haravin ordered and the signal caller raised a solid yellow
flag that he held firm above his head. The colonel turned to Sy. “Let them think on that
for a while.”
Sy pulled a spyscope from his pocket and peered into the edges of the city before him.
He reported his findings of obviously dead bloat spiders to the colonel and informed him
as well as to the condition of their webs. He could not venture a guess as to the casualties
of the goblins and wishing to remain conservative he stated that most probably escaped
injury.
With the break in movement before him, he urged his horse slightly to the left and
then back to the right. He tried to get a clean view down one of the wider roads that led
further into Connel. He didn’t expect he would see anything, but he hoped he might get a
glimpse of humans moving toward cover. That would at least give him an indication that
Ryson had begun the evacuation.
As his horse sidestepped further to the left at Sy’s urging, Burbon’s captain let out a
grunt of surprise. He pulled the horse to a halt, and peered deeper into the dark streets,
then pulled the spyscope away from his face. He looked at the city in absolute
bewilderment and then returned the scope to his eye.
“What is it?” the colonel commanded.
Sy shook his head and at first said nothing. He quickly handed the spyscope to the
Colonel. “Take a look down the wide street straight ahead of me” Sy then pointed in front
of him.
Colonel Haravin took the eyepiece and moved his own horse into a better position.
“What in blazes is that?!”
“Those are dwarves,” Sy said.
“Are you sure?”
“Beyond sure, I’ve seen them before, I’ve fought them before. I know what a dwarf
formation moving down a street looks like.”
“What in blazes are they doing here now?” the colonel barked. “They attacked Connel
before.”
“Yes, right before they attacked Burbon,” Sy confirmed.
The colonel urged his horse further off to the left and looked down another street.
“There’s more of them. Good Godson, a great many more!” He handed the eyepiece back
to Sy for him to take another look. “Could they have used this as an opportunity to take
the city for themselves, or perhaps even joined with the creatures?”
Sy took a quick look and then shook his head. “Doesn’t appear that way. They’re
attacking the goblins, and they’re attacking in great force.”
The dwarves began swarming into Connel from dozens of points all across the city. In
some cases they used existing access tunnels. Some of these were clear, never sealed by
the humans because they were not found or because they were located beneath the rubble
of a collapsed building. Dwarves, however, could move rubble like the wind moves dried
leaves. Others that had been sealed proved even less a deterrent as the dwarves plowed
through the dirt that filled the holes as if it wasn’t there. They also quickly dug new
passages to the surface, passages that would bring them closer to the outskirts of the city
and directly upon the goblins they sought.
Once in the open streets, the dwarves dropped into battle formations. They drew close,
their armor locked together, forming wedges that pressed forward with undeterred power.
Though they lacked natural speed, they marched in union at double time. Soon nearly
every road leading to the outer edges of Connel was filled with dwarf battle groups
looking to smash their intended foes.
The goblins at first had no idea what was coming for them. Their backs were to these
streets, their attention on the humans that were engaged outside the city. The hook hawks,
however, patrolled the skies, and as they screeched warnings, eventually the goblins took
heed. As they turned to witness this spectacle of doom that now charged toward them,
their eyes widened in terror. In their haste, they fired their crossbows wildly. Most bolts
missed their targets completely. Those that managed to hit a dwarf simply bounced
harmlessly off thick battle armor.
In this moment, the outcome of the ensuing battle was already clear. No matter what
the size of a goblin horde, it was no match for a fully armored battalion of angry and
determined dwarves. Dwarves worked and fought together in unison. They understood
war and battle tactics and they did not know fear. This was a combination of assets that
stripped the goblins clean of any potential advantage.
The goblin horde had no such harmony. Though their strength lie in numbers, they
could never boast of being a truly cohesive unit. They moved in waves of bedlam and
used chaos and turmoil to confuse and demoralize their victims. On this day, they faced
dwarves and dwarves laugh at such attempts. The goblins could not intimidate this foe
through fear and though their ranged weapons might have given them an edge against the
slow moving dwarves, they lacked the proper discipline to use that advantage effectively.
Eventually, the dwarves would fight through any barrage of crossbow fire and turn this
into a battle of close quarters, a battle the goblins could not possibly win.
Those shags that guarded the few clear passages in and out of Connel and others that
protected the goblin flanks would fall first. Shags possessed the strength and size and
could match a dwarf in a test of sheer power, but one shag against thirty dwarves with
mace and axe was not a fair contest. Those shags that charged the dwarf formations headon were dispatched with frightening speed. While their thick fur was ample protection
against most hazards, it could not save them against bone crushing mace blows or the
powerful swings of a dwarf axe.
The dwarf battle groups marched unimpeded toward the final positions of the goblins
when they met their first true challenge. Attacks from the air began to impede the
dwarves’ progress. Hook hawks began to swoop low from the sky and grab and scratch
with sharp clawed talons. Though razor crows joined the fray by flying in maddened
circles, they did little more that distract the dwarves. Still, they proved an annoyance and
allowed the hook hawks greater time to make more passes that slowly began to cause
casualties.
From their position outside the city, Sy and Colonel Haravin witnessed the battle with
growing enthusiasm. It was clear the dwarves were attacking the dark creatures, and it
was now their attention to assist in any way they could.
The colonel called for his closest lieutenants. He had new orders and they could not be
delivered with flag signals.
“Disperse this order throughout the ranks. We will move to the very edge of the city
and keep circling it at attack speed. Keep the goblins sandwiched between us and the
dwarves. If a hook hawk swoops down into range, open fire with bows. The same goes
for any goblins trying to escape out of the city. Make note of any clear entrances you see.
Do not enter the city at this time, but we will need to make use of them later.”
The soldiers urged their mounts forward and came to the very outskirts of Connel,
almost within arms reach of the webs that encased the outer edges of the city. They no
longer feared crossbow fire for the dwarves were now engaging the goblins in close
combat. The horses began to move at a furious pace always circling the city. Whenever a
hook hawk attempted to swoop in for an attack, it received a barrage of arrows that
swiftly dropped it to the ground. Even the razor crows were quickly dispersed by the
flood of arrows that now swam through the dark night air over the heads of dwarf and
goblin.
Trapped between the human cavalry circling the city and the dwarves storming
through their entrenchments, the goblins panicked. They broke ranks and ran with
disregard to their ultimate fate. In the end, this simply hastened their demise.
With the goblins routed, the dwarves turned their attention to the bloat spiders. Their
axes made quick work of any web threads that blocked a city street, and their maces
ended the threat of those few creatures that remained alive. Once all the webs were
cleared, the dwarves turned about with a mind toward destroying every last goblin
retreating back through the streets.
As most streets were now cleared and entrance into Connel could occur unimpeded,
Colonel Haravin could not pass up the opportunity. “Signal an entry into the city, secure
the main roads and follow inward to engage any fleeing goblins.”
The soldiers followed these orders gladly, especially those belonging to the cavalry of
Connel. They moved through the streets quickly passing the dwarves and closed upon the
heels of the few remaining goblins. As they secured the roads, Sy and Haravin pulled to a
halt to size up the situation.
“Do you think your team even bothered to evacuate anyone?” Haravin asked.
“I doubt it,” Sy replied. “They would have had to use the same tunnels as the dwarves.
I’m sure Ryson would have seen what was going on and put a halt to it even if they
started. My guess is most of the people are probably taking shelter inside their homes.”
“Once we secure these main roads, we can begin searching the inner sections of the
city. The dwarves didn’t leave much of the goblins to be any threat.”
Sy nodded and then looked about curiously. He realized the number of dwarf battle
groups in the streets was dwindling fast. Those he could see began to drop into holes in
the ground and fell completely out of sight.
“They’re leaving,” Sy pointed out. “I guess they did what they came to do and are
going home. Maybe Connel has turned an enemy into a friend.”

Once Ryson was above ground, he moved swiftly to the surrounding houses. He didn’t
expect too many people would open their doors if he simply knocked, especially with the
city infested by goblins. Instead, he peered into windows and when he spotted anyone, he
quickly and quietly called for their attention. He explained that dwarves were
approaching, but this time they were here to attack the dark creatures and no one else.
Many he spoke to reacted to this news with downright disbelief, and the delver truly
could not blame these people. He told them to sit tight indoors, stay out of the way, and
watch for themselves as to who the dwarves would attack.
He moved as fast as possible but the streets were deserted and most people were
reluctant to be seen. He had spoken only to a few when the dwarves began appearing in
the streets. Ryson hoped that the citizens of Connel would stay indoors and allow the
dwarves to meet the goblins unimpeded. As he watched the progress of the dwarf battle
groups, he realized that hope would be met.
With the dwarves topside and ignoring the humans and their structures, Ryson felt that
this was far more proof then anything he could say to those trapped in Connel. He
believed Lief and Holli could do enough to warn anyone that might come out on the
streets to cross paths with the dwarves, and so he turned his attention to reaching the
Church of Godson as quickly as possible.
He moved near top speed through the backstreets and alleys in order to avoid any
dwarf formations. In a blur, he dashed through the darkness and covered the distance in
mere moments. He came to a sudden halt at the steep stone steps of the Church of
Godson. As he did, he realized there were several small groups of goblins crouched about
the doors and corners of the church.
Leaping forward without hesitation, he never gave these creatures a chance to know
he was there. He never drew his own sword, left it sheathed across his back. Instead, he
pulled a short sword from the grip of a surprised goblin. Using the flat of the blade, he
swung it down hard on the tops of their heads. When he completed his path around the
entire building, over a dozen goblins lay in unconscious heaps scattered about the church
grounds.
Ryson crept up to the large oak doors at the front of the church and pushed one open
slowly and quietly. Carefully peering inside, he saw several people that appeared to be
members of the church sprawled uncomfortably about the benches of the church. They all
looked tired, disheveled, and most appeared withdrawn as if they waited for the swing of
an executioner’s axe they knew they could not stop. The condition of these people left the
delver angry, and he threw open the door with disgust.
As the door banged open loudly against a wall, the people inside jumped with a start.
They looked at the delver with darkened and confused expressions. None of them made a
move to approach him. They appeared as if they could not trust what they saw.
“Don’t worry, I’m not here to hurt you. Is anyone or anything inside here guarding
you?” Ryson asked firmly.
No one answered aloud but many pointed to an open archway that led to a darkened
passage. Ryson began to move toward that doorway when a figure stepped out of the
shadows and into the light of the church’s main hall. Ryson recognized him immediately
even though he was much gaunter than the delver remembered.
“Hello Edward, or would you prefer me to call you Mayor Consprite?” Ryson asked
with an edge of anger to his voice.
“Thanks to you I’m no longer the mayor, but also thanks to you I now have a position
of power among these pathetic people.”
“Thanks to me?” Ryson asked.
“Yes, you see you introduced me to the fairy tales of the Book of Godson,” Consprite
offered with a sarcastic grin. “I, however, was able to separate the fantasy from the fact in
that book. When the Sphere of Ingar was destroyed, I understood better than most what
that would mean now that magic changed everything. The book, though humorous
throughout, gave me some idea of what to expect. I learned where to find power that
didn’t require me to obtain a position such as mayor.”
“Is that it?” Ryson asked with a near growl. “You suddenly pick up a book, then you
turn on the people that believe in that book and you blame me for what you’ve done? I
know what you’ve done to the people of this church. I know how you sent them to the
desert. You can’t put one ounce of that blame on me. You are totally responsible and you
will pay for it.”
“I’m not blaming you at all,” Consprite retorted haughtily. “Blame implies that I’ve
done something wrong, and I’ve done nothing wrong. I’ve simply changed my
perspective to be in better alignment with how things now work in the land.”
Ryson was becoming more disgusted with this man with every word he spoke, but he
could not refrain from asking more questions. “And how do you think things work now?
How is it that you can possibly justify what you’ve done here?”
“It doesn’t need justifying beyond me standing here as I am. I have not been affected
by the goblins taking over this town. If anything, I’ve benefited from it.”
“That benefit is about to end,” Ryson stated confidently. “Right now an entire army of
dwarves is rushing through the streets to remove the goblin horde. Where is that going to
leave you?”
Consprite actually laughed. “It happened sooner than I expected, but it’s not a
surprise. Well, that’s not completely true; the dwarf thing is a surprise. Who would have
thought those little bastards would come to Connel’s aid. But it’s no surprise these
goblins are going to get their turn at the stake so to speak. They couldn’t tie their shoes
without help. Actually, I don’t even know if they wear shoes, never looked down that far.
Their faces are bad enough to look at. That Sazar has more power than I would have
expected, helped out by the witch in the desert, but I always knew his grasp exceeded his
reach, or is it the other way around? I never understood that statement. Anyway, basically
he seemed to want way more than he could really handle. Eventually, he was going to be
taken down. That’s why this doesn’t change things for me. Whether he and his goblin
horde get annihilated or not is immaterial. It leaves me in no different place than I stood
before. I don’t need the goblins, just as I no longer need the pathetic people of Connel.
You see, I don’t have to worry about being a politician anymore—about saying the right
things, making it seem like you’re giving them something for nothing, or bailing them out
of a disaster of their own making. The new inhabitants of this land understand one thing
and one thing alone, power.”
Ryson shook his head. “The problem with that is you don’t have any power.”
“Power is what you make it,” Consprite said smugly, “and I know how to make
alliances of power. You see I have a friend now.”
Suddenly, Ryson sensed something behind him, something that wasn’t there a moment
ago. It was almost as if a very angry and evil presence simply appeared in the shadows.
As if to confirm that sensation, Ryson felt a sharp tug at his back. Something sliced the
belt at his shoulder that kept the Sword of Decree on his back, and the delver felt the
sword and sheath pull free. He twirled around in an instant and witnessed a familiar face,
a face he did not wish to see again.
“I see you remember me,” Janindise growled. “When we last met, you used this horrid
sword along with the coming dawn to force me into a bargain. Do you remember that as
well?”
Ryson stared angrily into the eyes of the vampire. At first he did not wish to even
acknowledge this woman, but his anger was growing hotter still. He realized that
somehow the ex-mayor had joined with this vampire and it disgusted him beyond reason.
Now, she was here in Connel and causing pain beyond her dark powers.
“I remember it very well,” Ryson finally responded. “You promised you would only
hunt dark creatures. You promised on what was left of your soul you would keep to that
bargain and now you are here terrorizing these people. I can only assume you do not
honor your word.”
The vampire’s eyes blazed with hate. “You vermin! I have kept to that bargain and
regretted every moment of it! Do you know how long I have drunk the foul swill of
rancid blood from goblins, shags, and river rogues?! But that ends tonight. There is much
time before the sun rises again, and you no longer have your precious sword to help you.”
Janindise held up the sword in victorious glee, and then quickly tied it about her own
waist. “It will remain sheathed at my side until I find the proper means to destroy it. You
will no longer have use of it again.” She peered deep into the delver’s eyes, her own eyes
becoming a mesmerizing mirror of the delver’s deepest fears and desires. She pressed all
of her will upon him as she now spoke in a more soothing tone. “You no longer need the
sword because you have no desire to use it against me, just as you no longer have the
desire to hold me to the promise I made so long ago. You wish to release me from that
promise now, don’t you?”
Ryson stared back in cold defiance. Even as the face of this monster twisted into
illusions of fear and fantasy, the delver remained firmly attached to reality. “No, I do not!
I hold you to that promise. Drink from an innocent at your own peril. You made that
bargain to save your life and there’s nothing you can do to make me free you from it.”
Ryson stared back even deeper into the cold abyss of Janindise’s eyes. He took no
comfort in what he saw there, but he took strength in his own beliefs, his own faith, his
own understanding of right and wrong and good and evil. He focused on the faces of his
friends, his feelings for Linda and her feelings for him. He took hold of his inner strength
and pressed it back against the nightmare in the vampire’s eyes. “You took my will once
before. I remember what that was like and I will never, ever let that happen again. If you
wish to try harder, you have my blessings. Just like you, I have all night, but unlike you I
can last through the dawn.”
In a scream of rage, Janindise lashed out at the delver. “Very well, but I will not be
denied. You will release me from my vow! I made my bargain with you. When I drink
from your veins, I will control you despite your strong will. I will make you relieve me
from that bargain even if I have to break it first.”
She reached out with the razor sharp claws of her fingernails, but she found nothing
but empty air as the delver leapt clear of her swing. Revealing her own swiftness, she
jumped toward him with her hands at his throat, but again she failed to take hold of her
target as Ryson easily dodged around her.
Ryson turned his back to the vampire and hopped up on an empty bench. He then
bounded toward a wall and used it to propel himself higher into the air where he grabbed
hold of a rafter in the ceiling. He swung himself around as he perched himself far out of
reach.
“You think just because I don’t have that sword that I’m defenseless?” he taunted her.
Janindise hissed. “And do you think you are safe up there?” She said no more as her
body faded into a dark, inky mist. The vaporous cloud floated upward with surprising
speed. As it reached the rafters, the vampire’s body solidified once more and now she had
a firm hold of the wooden beams. With one quick rocking motion, she launched herself
toward the delver.
The move surprised the delver, but only for a moment. A being that moved with his
speed was used to reacting to an ever-changing environment nearly instantaneously. He
dropped low, swinging forward on a single beam, and then released his hold to fall
gracefully to the floor. He landed on his feet and bounded over three benches as if they
were nothing more than blades of grass. He whirled about and leapt across the entire
expanse of the open room and landed at the front door. He stopped and twirled about.
He shook his head in defiance as he faced the vampire once more. “I was going to take
this outside, but I don’t have to. We can stay right here.”
“Arrogant fool, you have so much confidence in your own speed that you
underestimate mine!” Janindise flew from the rafters to the back of the church and the
doors where Ryson stood.
“Speed? You have no idea what speed is,” Ryson yelled and in a flash barely visible
he ran up toward the front of the church and stood right by the alter.
The vampire turned with another hiss and ran wildly after the delver like the demon
she was. “You will release me of my vow and you will then die at my hand!”
Ryson jumped up into the rafters once more as Janindise barreled into the front wall.
As he hung over her head, he called a question down to her. “Just to make sure I
understand this, I have to ask. If you ever do get a hold of me, which you won’t, but for
argument’s sake, let’s say that you do. Once you feed on me, you will have broken your
word. What’s left of your soul is lost. Why bother having me release you of your promise
once you’ve already broken it?”
The vampire looked up and bared her teeth at the delver. The white fangs sparkled in
the candlelight of the alter. “It won’t matter if the bargain is broken if you release me of
it. It doesn’t matter which happens first.”
“I think it does,” Ryson countered.
“I don’t care what you think! I will feed on whatever I like once I am finished with
you!”
“The only thing you’re going to feed on after this night is over is the sun.”
“You will never survive that long!”
“I don’t tire, certainly not from being chased by you,” the delver scoffed.
Janindise leapt with her arms stretched toward the delver. She never reached him. An
arrow with a wooden shaft pierced her heart at its very center. The strike sent her
sprawling back against the wall. Her eyes widened in disbelief. As she took her last
glance of this world, she saw Lief Woodson stepping further into the church with his bow
in his hand.
Edward Consprite stumbled to Janindise’s side. He tried to hold up her body to keep
her from hitting the floor, but he lacked the strength. Her body was already cold to the
touch as it folded through his arms and sunk to the ground. As Consprite looked down
upon his fallen ally, he watched in dismay as her skin began to shrivel and fall loose
around her bones. The flesh and muscle behind it decomposed at an unbelievable rate,
almost as if her body was deflating. In mere moments, there was nothing but a grey
leathery hide that sagged around her skeletal frame. Soon after, even these remains began
to disintegrate until there was nothing left but hair and clumps of loose debris that could
be easily scatted by the slightest wind.
Consprite turned to the elf with both sadness and fury in his eyes. His own frame was
haggard and his gate uneven, but he stalked toward the elf with evil intentions. The sight
was almost humorous until another arrow from Lief’s bow pierced his heart as well.
Consprite crumpled to the floor with a low groan and died right there in this Church of
Godson.
Ryson dropped down out of the rafters and on to the floor. He inspected the granular
remains of the vampire as he picked up his sword and returned it to its place on his back.
He then moved to the corpse of the ex-mayor. He looked upon the body with a shake of
his head. Finally, he looked up at Lief.
“Thank you,” the delver said surprisingly.
“Are you not going to argue with me over necessity of the death of these two?” Lief
asked almost too perplexed to offer the question.
Ryson looked about the room, looked into the hollow faces of those that spent the last
few days trapped in this church. Though there were traces of joy in being freed, it did
little to chase away their extreme exhaustion.
“No, I’m not going to argue about it. I would have let the sun take care of her. Your
way was quicker. As for him, you only get so many chances. He more than abused his.”
“I am pleased to hear that.”
Ryson nodded to Holli who was now standing next to him. “Is everything going
alright outside?”
Holli answered without hesitation. “The dwarves have the situation well in hand. They
have dispatched the shags and are now closely engaged with the goblins at the outer
limits of the city. Lief and I met not far from here. We agreed it would be futile to try to
explain the situation to the humans here any further. If they do not believe their own eyes,
they would not believe the word of an elf. I do not expect there to be any conflict
between human and dwarf, at least not on this night.”
“What about the cavalry outside the city?”
“They have Connel surrounded. They have already dispatched nearly every bloat
spider. I doubt they will allow any of the goblins to escape. Eventually they will make it
through the webs and enter the city to assist the dwarves.”
“I guess that takes care of that. That means there’s just Sazar to deal with now.”
Holli did not answer but looked to Lief. Her expression was not lost on the delver.
“What is it?” Ryson asked.
Lief became almost rigid as he began to explain. “I believe Sazar can be left to the
dwarves or the human soldiers that enter the city. He is not the true threat here anyway.
Instead, I now have another proposal that Holli has forced me to discuss with you. She
and I have conferred about it briefly, but she demands that you be included in this
decision.”
“What decision?” Ryson pressed with greater curiosity.
“It is the sorceress Tabris that is truly responsible for what has happened here. She
must be dealt with and I believe she must be dealt with before she learns of what has
happened here. Holli has told me that she knows where Tabris is in the Lacobian Desert.
Not only that, she has the ability to bring us there utilizing her own magic powers. That
may give us the opportunity we need.”
“You want to go right now?” Ryson asked with slight amazement.
“We may never have such an opportunity,” Lief stated grimly. “Very soon she will
learn that the goblins have been defeated here in Connel. Once that occurs, she will
realize that many will connect her to the crimes that have been committed here. If she
does, at the very least she will make stronger preparations for those that may seek her out
for justice. She may even decide to leave the area she is at now. If she does that, we will
not have the same ability to reach her with such ease.”
“So exactly what is it you want to do?” Ryson questioned.
“I would have Holli transport us to a point immediately outside her oasis. I would then
move upon her with as much speed as possible in hopes of catching her unaware. I would
strike with the same speed and end her as a threat.”
“So you want to kill her,” Ryson stated as his voice died off.
Lief controlled any rising anger. He would not argue with the delver openly, but he
decided to ask simple questions instead. “Do you think we have the power to capture
her?”
“No.”
“Do you think she’s a danger to this land?”
“Yes,” Ryson admitted after a long pause.
In his own mind, Lief believed that was enough to justify his intended actions. The
delver, however, would need more. “More importantly, because I know you don’t wish to
act based solely on what someone is capable of doing—which is what you once told
me—do you believe she should be held accountable for what she has done?”
Ryson looked around once more and wondered how many of the people in this church
had lost a friend or a family member to satisfy the trials of Tabris. He thought about how
many had suffered in Connel beyond these walls over the past few days. He knew Sazar
brought the plague of goblins on this city, but ultimately he was enabled by Tabris’
power. If she had not chosen to assist him for her own benefit, he would not be here
today. He knew she was as responsible as the serp for all the misfortune that was caused
in this place, and yet he was not certain what to say. The delver, however, did not get the
opportunity to answer at that moment.
Enin stepped into the center room as if he walked through a doorway that materialized
for his own personal benefit and then faded at his whim. He walked up to the two elves
and the delver. “You have done well here. Connel is now free. Sy is well and already
within the city limits. The soldiers that ride with him are hunting down the stragglers of
goblins, razor crows, and hook hawks. The dwarves are even now returning to their
home.”
Holli could not contain her surprise. “You’ve been watching us all?”
“Watching and listening,” Enin admitted.
“Then you heard what Lief just said?” the elf guard asked with a questioning glance.
“I did.”
“And what is your opinion of this idea?”
“It is not for me to say.”
Lief spoke in a disgusted tone. “Then say nothing and stay out of our way.”
Enin looked upon the elf with a puzzled expression. “I am not standing in you way.
Do what you think you must.”
Holli could not leave it at that. “And what if I say I must do more than simply bring
them to Tabris? What if I say I feel I have to help them in this cause, that I have to do
whatever is in my power to stop this sorceress?”
This caught Enin somewhat off guard. “You wish to battle Tabris? Do you understand
the consequences of such a decision? No matter what happens, there will be a shift in the
balance. There is great weight in what you intend to do, it will affect many things. You
can’t simply do this on a whim.”
Holli shook her head. “It is not a whim. And as to the balance and the effect, that is
how you see it. I have never been able to accept that. What I do is based on what I think
is the best course of action. Though I am no longer allowed to protect my camp, I am still
an elf guard. That is what I am. I look at this situation and realize that it’s not about the
balance of magic power. It’s about what should be done, what needs to be done. You
wish to try to break everything down to some kind of philosophical question regarding
interference and people’s choice. It is indeed about choice, but it is not as complicated as
you wish to make it. It’s about my choice and what I think I should do. Tabris has done
great harm here and she will do it again. Even if she doesn’t do it again, she has to be
held accountable for what she has done here. She has to be stopped.”
“You are not powerful enough to defeat her on your own,” Enin said in a warning
tone.
Here Holli became resolute. “Sometimes you don’t need to be more powerful to do
what needs to be done. There is more to any battle than that. I will also not be on my
own. I will be with Lief and Ryson, if indeed the delver agrees to accompany us.”
Ryson, instead of answering the questioning glance of Holli, turned a plea to the
wizard. “You can stop this right now, Enin. I know you have the power.”
Enin looked into the delver’s eyes, and though he found it extremely difficult to deny
Ryson’s request, he made it clear he could not bring himself to intervene. “Yes, I have
the power, but do I have the right? You wanted me to remove the goblins from Connel.
And yet, you all seemed to handle that quite well on your own. In fact, the way I see it,
much good has come from me not interfering. The dwarves choose to use this
opportunity to come to the aide of Connel. The people of this city once believed the
dwarves to be their enemies, now they think differently. The dwarves now feel they have
restored their honor and have let go of their collective guilt. It seems to me that my
decision to stay out of the way was the correct one, but you quickly forget this. Now, you
want me to go to the Lacobian and deal with Tabris.”
Ryson did not give up so easily in the face of Enin’s argument. “But this is different.
This isn’t freeing a city, this is just one person, a powerful sorceress. You’re the best
equipped to deal with her. You don’t even have to kill Tabris. You can contain her, place
her in a magical prison or something. Why can’t you do this?”
Lief turned on the Enin as well. “What say you wizard? You really can not hope to
argue with his logic. You of all people know how much a threat this sorceress can be. Are
you going to just stand by and let her empower another serp just so she can gain more test
subjects for her spells? Or will you finally act?”
Holli added her own thoughts. “You yourself said Tabris turned to evil. Those were
your own words. She has done a terrible thing here and she must not be allowed to simply
walk away.”
Enin felt as if he was being unfairly outnumbered, that those he called friend were
now completely disregarding his own understanding of the situation. He appeared
shocked and sounded more than angry. A fury was growing in him and it became
apparent in his words. “How many times do I have to tell you people? Am I speaking
some strange language? Is it so very difficult to understand? Really, I want to know? For
the love of Godson, it is not that complicated! Why is it you wish me to insert myself into
the paths of others. I am not some god that you can come to in order to solve every
problem that comes into existence. There are certain things we all must face—events,
circumstances, people, life paths that we can not escape. We will face them whether we
want to or not. That is destiny. How we deal with these events is our choice. No one
dictates these decisions. We make them on our own. We can meet our challenges with
honesty, faith, determination, honor, integrity and courage, yes courage. Or we can
choose to deal in deception, anger, bitterness, and fear. When we do we choose a path we
choose between right and wrong, good and evil. These are decisions of the greatest
magnitude and define who we are. If I start to make these choices for you, I stop you
from becoming what you were meant to be. Don’t you understand that?”
Though Ryson and Holli became silent, Lief was not impressed and made his own
understanding known. “And how many times do I have to tell you? It’s not just what we
do, it’s what we don’t do. We are asking you to act. You are using excuses to avoid such
action. That is not a reflection of us, it is a reflection of you. You talk to us as if we are
making some kind of unholy request. That is nonsense. We are asking you to do what you
are capable of doing and what should be done. When you do not act, there are
consequences. Look at this carcass on the floor.” Lief paused just long enough to point to
the body of Edward Consprite. “This is the human that attempted to stand in our way
when we needed to destroy Ingar’s sphere. Tell me wizard, how many lives would have
been saved if I killed this pathetic excuse of a human when I first met him as opposed to
now? How MANY?!”
The elf would not cease to allow for an answer. His own anger flushed his face and his
temple throbbed with a pulsating vein.
“Now let’s turn to this sorceress. You don’t wish to interfere in the choices of others
so you will let her simply go about her business in the desert. I can not take such a
position, not in good conscious. If I do nothing when I have the ability to act, then I am
just as responsible for the evil she commits because it could have been avoided if only I
did something to stop her. I don’t wish to live with that. That is my choice!”
Lief was not yet done and now he turned to the delver.
“And what of you, Ryson? I call you friend, but you have not yet divulged your
decision. We’ve actually had this discussion before, and more than once. Only a few days
ago, you would not allow me to kill the river rogue. Do you remember? You believed all
life had value. Fine. I won’t argue the point, I’ll use it instead. We allowed Consprite to
live back before we left for Sanctum Mountain to retrieve the sphere. We could have
killed him right there, but you insist there’s a value on life, even Consprite’s. But what of
the lives that have been lost since? Have they no value? How many died because of
Consprite? How many from the Church of Godson suffered? How many were tortured by
a mad sorceress because he condemned them.
“And let’s not forget about that sorceress. Are we not responsible for her? We are the
one’s that brought her to Sanctum Mountain when we needed to destroy the sphere. As I
remember it, she didn’t want to use the magic, isn’t that what she said to us at Sanctum’s
peak? But we convinced her it was necessary.”
Ryson recalled the event clearly. He remembered how he implored Lauren, who had
become Tabris, to use the magic to help get the sphere out of Sanctum Mountain. Still, he
also remembered how important it was to get to the talisman and he said as much. “It was
necessary. Everyone would have died if the sphere was not destroyed. She used the magic
to save everyone.”
“And now she uses magic to kill,” Lief shot back. “The truth is we have to take
responsibility for what we’ve done. Who knows what would have happened if she
decided not to use the magic? Who is to say that we wouldn’t have found some other way
to stop the sphere? Your friend here says we have to deal with choices. We had a choice
then, and we have a choice now. Do we face up to our responsibility that in some way we
created Tabris?”
Lief turned to Enin and fired off his final thought. “One other thing you should
consider, wizard. Maybe actions can be right and wrong, good and evil, as you like to
profess. But what about inaction? Where do you want to place the decision not to do
anything, to stand back and allow things to happen that should not happen? Where is the
good and evil in that?”
“What do you mean?” Enin asked.
“I mean that certain inaction can be as harmful as any action. It’s not always enough
to say that I did not do anything unjust or evil, as you seem to like to put it. I’ve realized
that not doing anything can lead to just as much pain and suffering. How many suffered
because the elders of my camp did nothing when Petiole was in charge? And now you
hold to the same attitude. You are using an excuse of not interfering, but it is the same
thing. You point to what has happened here in Connel as justification for your inaction.
You want to point to everything good that occurred here and use it to defend how you did
nothing. In my mind, that is beyond cowardly. You wish to actually take credit for not
acting.”
“I am not taking credit,” Enin responded angrily. “I only said that my decision not to
interfere was the proper one.”
“And I say to you it is an argument of convenience. It allows you to stand back and
remove yourself from what needs to be done. If that’s what you want, very well, but there
are others that do not feel the same way.”
Enin frowned, but said nothing further to the elf. He turned to the delver instead.
“What about you Ryson? Do you agree with him?”
Ryson heaved a heavy breath and replied with all the honesty his heart allowed. “I
don’t agree with everything Lief says. When I listen to him it sounds as if he wants to
punish people for what they are capable of doing and not what they actually do. That’s
not right. But the truth is that’s not what we’re dealing with here. We know what Tabris
has done. I don’t know if I am responsible for it or not, but I do know we can’t just
pretend it never happened and just leave her in the desert. I wish you would see it that
way, Enin. I really do think you are the one best suited to handle this, but if you won’t,
then I don’t see any other choice. This may be our best opportunity to stop her.” Ryson
paused and looked to both Holli and Lief. “I’ll go with you and do whatever we have to
do.”
Holli did not let any silence stand for long. Instead, she made one last attempt to make
Enin understand. “Ryson is correct. There are times we simply must act. You taught me
how to use the magic and I’m grateful, but I have to choose how to use it. Isn’t that what
you also have been trying to tell us? Based on what I’ve seen and heard, I choose to help
them. I will take them to Tabris, and though it will use most of my energy to get them
there. I will use what I have left and all the rest of my abilities to stop her and keep her
from being a threat in the future. That is my choice.”
“I see,” the wizard said. “I will not stand in your way. You all must do what you think
is right.”
“I’m not sure if it will be enough,” Holli admitted, “so before I go, I want you to
consider something. You once said you were blessed with an understanding of your
power. I truly wonder now if that’s true. I for one can’t accept some of the things you
have told me. I understand the importance of balance in many things, but you’re grasp of
it escapes me. You say there is good and there is evil and in order to make sure that all
choice is fair, the two must always even out. Based on this notion of balance, you want
me to believe that you do not act because it means something evil will happen
somewhere else. To me, that makes no sense at all. If everyone has a choice of whether to
do right or wrong, good or evil, then it has to be possible that everyone could choose
good. If that were the case, there would be no evil.
“I’ve never accepted your argument that we must know sadness in order to experience
happiness, or that we must know pain in order to feel joy. Perhaps I am making things too
simple, but I do not think seeking a balance between these things would be in anyone’s
interest. It makes more sense to maximize the positive and minimize the negative, focus
on what is good and enhance it, deny what is bad and try to eliminate it. This is never
how you look at things. You constantly tell me that every good act can be evened out
with an act of evil. If that were true, perhaps we would have been better off if we let the
sphere destroy us all.
“Maybe because you are so powerful you have come up with this notion in order to
maintain your own reason. I can’t say. I see how powerful you are I think you have
become obsessed with the idea of balance. There are other things, however, you must
consider as well. Choosing means taking risks and when you use balance as an excuse,
you insulate yourself from these risks. You are right in not wanting to interfere with
people’s lives, but you are not right when you avoid using the gift you have been given
simply because you do not wish to take a risk.”
Holli stopped for just a moment and placed a hand on Enin’s cheek. “Thank you for
all you have taught me.” She then turned to Lief and Ryson. “If we are to do this, haste is
our best ally. Are you ready?”
Both nodded.
“Then prepare yourselves for we shall be on Tabris’ doorstep in a matter of moments.”
She then concentrated on a point in the Lacobian Desert and brought her hands together.
A green octagon of pure energy encircled her around her shoulders. She brought Lief and
Ryson together with her in her mind and the emerald shape expanded to surround them as
well. As she focused on a path through space and time that would bring them to the
desert, the green magic shimmered and crackled and then the three were gone.
Enin looked upon the empty space where they stood only moments ago. He thought of
Lief and he was sorry his last words to him were ones of anger. He considered Ryson and
knew that he would survive somehow for his destiny was not done. Finally, his thoughts
turned to Holli.
He did not wish to dwell on their parting for too long as her words struck something
within. As much as he tried to push aside what she said, tried to convince himself she did
not truly understand, he could not deny the spark of doubt that was now growing inside.
Something she said nagged at him because it seemed to generate a tremor in the vast
magical energy within him. For an instant, he wished to close the door on that sensation,
bury it back down deep. He could not, however, bring himself to do so. There was more
than a spark of truth in what the elf guard said to him, and at this moment, Enin needed to
be honest with himself more than at any other time in his life.
He focused deep within his own being, searched the magical energies which gave him
so much greater understanding of this existence and the next. He struck down at the false
perceptions of his own creation and opened himself up to the simple basic truths. He
would not allow his own fears and his own doubts to raise barriers against that which he
must now truly understand. He recalled his own words that it was his choice on how to
deal with moments of destiny. Would he face this moment with courage and faith, or with
fear and deception of his own making?
In a moment of unparalleled awareness, he realized that he now faced his own
moment of destiny. He did indeed face choices on how to use his power. He had been
correct about Connel, it was not always his right to interfere with the decisions of others,
but not all choices involved the same consequences. He also realized he had been wrong
about a number of other things. In that realization, he understood there were times when
he would have to act, when he would have to fight for what he believed in, when he
would have to use his power to defeat evil, not for his own glory, but for the sake of what
was right. One such time was before him now, and it was time for him to use his power.

During the last few moments of transport, Holli felt the waves of magical energy that
guided them over the land being ripped from her control. Just as she sensed the path
becoming distorted before they reached their destination, she found it more difficult to
maintain a link to her two companions. She doubled and redoubled her efforts to maintain
a path of travel and to keep Ryson and Lief enveloped in her spell. Despite her focus, the
disruption increased in intensity as they closed in on Tabris’ oasis. The pain was
agonizing and before they hit the sandy rock ground of the desert, she felt her own spell
rupture.
Holli hit the ground heavily, her legs absorbing a great force as if she fell from the
heights of a tall tree. She bit back a scream of pain as she crumpled to her knees. She had
reached her target, the very edge of Tabris’ oasis, but Lief and Ryson were not at her
side. She quickly felt her legs for breaks and was greatly relieved to find both were
sound. When she tried to rise up, she felt only slight pain in her left knee, but a wave of
exhaustion kept her from standing. She looked to her left and immediately spied Ryson a
short distance away. She peered deeper into the dark desert night and realized that Lief
was much further off in that same direction.
Ryson ran at top speed to Holli’s side. He bent his head low to get a look in her face.
“Are you alright?”
“I don’t know what happened. I lost control of the spell at the very end. I don’t think
I’m injured, but I feel weak, empty.”
Ryson explained his own experience. “I could feel your presence when you cast the
spell and the energy surrounded us. I could actually feel you carrying me and pressing me
over Dark Spruce and the rocky hills at the edge of the desert. In that last moment,
though, I felt something else, something that was pulling me away from you. Eventually,
both forces just stopped and I landed on the ground.”
An angry, bitter voice called from beyond the cold, dry air of the desert. It came from
within the oasis and it chilled Ryson much more than the pressing emptiness of the
Lacobian. “Is that Ryson Acumen? Is this the one I see? It is! The delver that brought me
to Sanctum now tries to invade my home with this pathetic elf witch as his guide. How
fitting! If you and your little witch are wondering what happened, let me make it clear. I
am what happened. The elf witch came here once before without my permission, did you
think I would allow that to happen again without taking precautions?”
Tabris halted her words after remembering the last time she saw Holli it was at the
side of Enin. A great moment of apprehension concerned her being as she spotted another
figure off to the side. She worried that Enin had somehow past her notice, that he
shrouded his great magical energy in order to catch her unaware. That concern ended
when she saw the shadowy figure raise a bow and fire an arrow at her with deadly
intentions. Enin would never have to resort to such a wretched attempt on her life. He had
the power to obliterate her with the wave of his hand. This new invader was almost not
worth her notice.
Lief had dashed further off into the darkness when he heard the voice of the sorceress.
He took a curved path to the very edge of the oasis away from Ryson and Holli in hopes
of being overlooked. When he raised his bow, he believed he had the chance to end this
conflict before it truly began. As he fired his arrow, he realized Tabris was now aware of
his presence, but he believed it was too late for her. She did not have the time to cast a
defensive spell in the instant it would take for the arrow to find its mark. To his
astonishment, the arrow flew off its intended path and disappeared into the night air.
“Did you also think I would place myself out in the open without taking a few
precautions?” Tabris scoffed toward Lief. “I cast a wind gust shield to deal with your
projectiles before you arrived. Anything you send toward me will be redirected
harmlessly away. You may fire all the arrows you wish at me, but unless you are standing
right in front of me, don’t expect them to hit their target.”
“Then I will stand right before you,” Lief shouted. He leapt forward, and though he
could never match the speed of the delver, his elf legs carried him with nimble quickness.
Not knowing if the sorceress might cast a spell, he darted to his left and right as he
endeavored to make himself a difficult target. He found it more than unusual that Tabris
made no attempt to raise her hands to cast a spell of any kind, until his body ran hard into
a powerful barrier he could not see. His own speed forward was matched by a nearly
identical force pressing outward from the oasis. The impact nearly hammered him into
unconsciousness. It certainly succeeded in knocking him off his feet as he fought back
the sting of pain that sucked away his breath.
“I recognize that voice as well,” Tabris hummed in amusement. “Isn’t that Lief
Woodson? This is too grand for me to believe. I have before me the delver and the two
elves that joined me in Sanctum Mountain. And just so you know, there is one more that
is with us tonight. He too was at Sanctum, though he did not enter the mountain.”
Lifting her arms in an arc above her head, Tabris focused her power into a crisp
diamond of crackling violet energy. She pressed her hands outward and a swirling wave
of wind danced through the plants and trees of her oasis. For a brief moment, no one
could see the target of her spell until the cradle of wind returned back to Tabris carrying
the body of a one-legged man. The spell evaporated just off to the sorceress’ right side
and the man dropped to the ground in an unbalanced shambles.
Ryson knew immediately that the form on the ground was that of the Reader Matthew.
He watched as the reader grappled with the hard rock to turn over on one side. When
Matthew finally raised himself on his lone knee and steadied himself with two hands flat
on the ground, the delver called out in concern.
“Matthew, it’s me, Ryson! Are you alright?”
“I’ve been better,” the reader muttered with a weak cough.
“His health will not be a concern in a matter of moments. I can sense through my own
spells that Sazar’s forces have been greatly reduced, almost completely eliminated. I
imagine you have something to do with that, don’t you delver?”
“We’ve taken Connel back from the serp,” Ryson answered sharply. “You won’t be
getting anymore helpless victims to practice on, if that’s what you’re worried about.”
“Shame,” Tabris sighed. “But if that’s the case, then I also no longer need to keep this
reader alive. I did so only so he might witness what I have become. I do not think he is
happy about it. I don’t know if I’m happy about it either, but I know who is to blame. The
truth is you are all responsible for what I am. Thus, you should all share in the
understanding of what that means.”
It was Lief who answered, and he did so with a raging fury from the center of his
being. “It is you that will understand that I will not allow you to continue.”
Tabris almost laughed, but she found anger as she looked to Lief. “You have no say at
all in what will be allowed. Have you learned nothing by being knocked to the ground?
Be aware that my wind gust shield that is so effective against your arrows was not the
only spell I prepared in advance. There is a storm barrier that protects my oasis. None of
you can enter, but my power can reach out to you.”
Lief jumped to his feet and then twirled about with his bow in hand. He pulled another
arrow and fired it at the sorceress. Again, though the arrow pierced the storm barrier, it
was easily blown wide of its target by the wind gust.
“You don’t learn, do you?” Tabris asked in slight amazement. “The arrow can enter
the oasis because of its very narrow form. It may be able to penetrate the storm barrier,
but that same shape allows it to be easily redirected by the power of the wind. As I said,
you can not reach me.”
“I can not reach you now sorceress, but I have patience. Your energy is not limitless.
Even now I can tell these two spells draw on your magical essence. You can not keep
these shields up indefinitely. They will eventually fall, and when they do, so shall you.”
“As I said before, you can not get to me but I can reach out to you,” Tabris growled.
“My energy does not need to be limitless. It only needs to last as long as it takes me to
dispose of you. As you are nothing but an insignificant insect, believe me I have far more
energy than I need for these shields to last.”
Lief said nothing. He leapt back several paces and then darted to his left. He grasped
another arrow and let it fly. Again, the projectile was pressed harmlessly away from
Tabris. The failure did not seem to frustrate him at all.
“I have dozens of arrows,” Lief finally shouted. “Each one that I fire weakens you
slightly. Each moment that passes drains you even more. I will remain here as long as it
takes. Your energy will fade and you will die.”
Tabris scowled. “You only have as long as I wish you to have!” She pressed her hands
together in front of her chest and mouthed several words. She then flung her hands
forward toward the elf and a bolt of deep purple lightning flew from her body. The streak
of deadly energy crackled as it knifed toward Lief. As the bolt made contact with the
ground, a dazzling explosion of violet light lit up the desert darkness and a boom of
thunder rattled the rocks nearby. Sandy debris clouded the area where Lief stood as the
sorceress pulled her arms back to the sides of her body.
A mere instant after the echo of the thunder clap subsided, another arrow streaked
toward Tabris. This one came several paces to the right of where Lief had previously
stood. As the dust settled, Lief’s outline became more apparent in the darkness.
“That will only hasten the time it takes for you to run out of energy,” the elf baited the
sorceress. “Keep it up, do not stop. You said you can reach us from where you stand, but
I am beginning to doubt it. With each spell you cast, you grow weaker. Your time is
running out.”
“Imbecile!” Tabris shrieked. “You have no idea of the extent of my power. I can cast
thousands of bolts of that power before I weaken. You can’t dodge forever. You are not
faster than the lightning.”
Lief shook his head with obvious scorn toward the sorceress. “I do not have to be
faster than the lightning. I only have to be faster than you.”
“Let us see if that’s true.”
Tabris pressed her hands together once more. Indiscernible words crossed her lips that
were snarled in anger. As a violet diamond formed at her pressed palms, her body shook
and trembled. The magical shape glowed brighter with each passing moment. When she
flung her arms toward Lief, the purple diamond exploded from her hands not in one bolt,
but in four. The streaks of energy cut across the dry air and pulsated with even more
radiance. As they struck the ground, they exploded into much larger blasts of power.
These separate fields of crackling energy joined with thin streams of electric arcs creating
a wide field of interlaced magical force. Once the streams surged the four fields together,
the entire area exploded in one massive burst.
At first, Ryson could see nothing, his vision spotted from the after effects of the blast.
As the flashes died away and his sight quickly cleared, he peered into the enormous
smoldering crater that resulted from the explosion. Very little remained beyond Lief’s
charred and broken bow, a few shattered arrows scattered among the rocks, and tatters of
a burnt and shredded cloak. There was no doubt in Ryson’s mind that Lief’s body had
been obliterated by the blast.
“Lief!” Ryson shouted out in agony. He wanted to run to the center of the crater, but
his legs would not move. Sorrow kept him frozen as his mind reeled against the loss of a
friend.
Tabris smiled with brief satisfaction. She turned her attention away from the smoking
rock and watched in glee at Ryson’s torment.
“I guess I was faster then him after all,” she taunted those that could hear.
The joy in her voice left Ryson beyond angry. His emotions boiled and he nearly
shook with rage. He stepped away from Holli to create a clear path between him and the
sorceress. He knew he could not reach Tabris at the moment, not while the storm barrier
between them still stood, but he also knew that Lief was right. The sorceress could not
maintain the energy shields forever. He would only have to wait for the moment they fell,
and he knew he could avoid her blasts indefinitely, no matter how large she made them.
“You’re not faster than me,” he growled.
Tabris eyed the delver with caution and quickly placed her hands together. “Careful,
delver. Do not do anything rash. No, I am not faster than you, but then again I don’t have
to be. At the moment, you can’t reach me, and I will not waste time or energy on trying to
strike you. I am aware of your speed. I am also, however, aware of the other elf’s
condition. She has many powers, it’s true, but right now she has exhausted her energy.
She is no match for me. And then, of course, there is this pathetic human by me. He is
also your friend. How easy would it be for me to extinguish his life? How long can you
stand there, delver? At what moment will you make a mistake and miscalculate what I
might do. Eventually, I will strike you down, just as I struck down your friend.”
Tabris paused for a moment as a devilish grin washed across her face. She took a
quick glance at the reader on the ground in front of her and then toward Holli still on her
knees. Her smile grew as she made an unholy offer.
“I make a deal with you, delver, one that I’m not going to give you much time to
consider and no time to argue. I’m going to cast a single energy bolt spell at where you
stand. You will be able to dodge it easily if you so desire, but that would leave us in the
same position we are right now. If, however, you accept your fate, allow the bolt to strike
you and end your life, I will spare your other elf friend. I will allow the female to walk
away. All you must do is surrender yourself to death. Do so and I will even let her escort
the reader out of the desert as well. Your life for theirs. It’s a simple bargain.”
Ryson tried to shout out, but Tabris would not listen. She made her offer clear. “There
is no argument. I am casting the spell now. You will not get a second chance. If you
dodge the bolt, I will kill them both. If you don’t they will live.”
Tabris pressed her palms together and began to whisper the words of the spell. She
watched Ryson intently, wondering if he would fight off the instincts to survive and
sacrifice himself, or if he would leap away and allow the next bolts she cast to strike
down his friends. The violet diamond returned to her hands as she prepared to finish the
spell.
With Tabris’ attention so fixed upon the delver, Reader Matthew was able to struggle
up from his one knee. He kept his hands palm down against the cool grass-covered
ground of the oasis. He was already within the barrier that blocked Ryson from reaching
Tabris and so he had an unbounded path to the sorceress. With all his remaining strength,
he used his hands and his one leg to launch himself toward her. In that brief instant, he
caught her totally off guard as he wrapped his arms completely around her.
Tabris’ hands were still locked together at her chest. With the reader’s arms clamped
around her and his own body pressed against hers, she could not release her arms. She
had just finished reciting the spell but found herself completely unable to release the
magical energy that continued to swell between their two bodies.
“Release me you fool!” she screeched.
Matthew’s arms only pulled tighter around her. “Not today. I told you faith was
stronger than magic and I guess I finally have the faith to defeat you.”
Tabris struggled to free her hands, but she could not break the hold of the reader. The
glow of the violet diamond doubled then tripled. It began to swirl and soon it encased
both Tabris and Matthew. In one climactic burst, the energy imploded on them both.
Tabris’ body was torn apart by the internal blast and the force threw Matthew heavily
against a large boulder.
With Tabris dead, the wind barrier collapsed and nothing stood between the oasis and
the delver. Ryson sprinted to the side of the reader and dropped to his knees so he could
lift his head from the ground. Something felt very wrong with Matthew’s body, as if it
was much too yielding and offering almost no resistance to Ryson’s grasp.
“Matthew? Can you hear me?” Ryson asked wondering if the reader could even
answer.
Matthew’s eyelids flickered, but his sight seemed out of focus. His eyes rolled about
in all directions as if searching for a moving target behind a shifting screen. “Ryson?”
Ryson knew in that moment there was nothing that could save the reader, yet still he
wanted to help his friend. “Is there anything I can do for you?”
“Actually there is,” Matthew offered in a hollow, raspy voice. “Tell Consprite that
faith is no fairy tale.”
Ryson bit down on his lip, but managed to tell the truth. “I’m sorry. I can’t tell him.
He’s dead.”
“Then I guess he already knows.”
“I’m sure he does,” Ryson replied through a hard swallow.
Matthew’s eyes stopped rolling about. They fixed on a position in the sky and for one
last moment there was pure clarity in his vision. “Do you see it? Within the stars, not all
of them… but some of them are more.”
Ryson turned his head skyward and looked into the twinkling mass of light overhead.
In this darkness, many of the stars seemed to almost mesh together into one mist-like
cloud that sparkled with purity. One point of light, however, appeared to separate itself
from the rest. It grew brighter, its intensity magnified. It looked almost as if the star was
floating down from the sky, gently lowered by a cool desert breeze.
Matthew’s last gaze fixed upon this star and the moment before he died he recognized
the face of an old friend imbedded in this light. He could clearly see the features of the
interpreter that had died on Sanctum Mountain.
“Stephen?” Matthew questioned as a smile folded across his lips. “It is you! I am
ready.”
Reader Matthew died with those words.
As if Matthew’s death was a cue for his entrance, Enin appeared out of the darkness
and placed a hand upon Ryson’s shoulder.
“His faith was strong as will be his reward,” the wizard said.
Ryson wanted to cast off the wizard’s hand, but instead he held to Matthew. He
managed to speak what he was feeling. “You could have prevented this, all of this.”
“No, I couldn’t. It was his time, as it was Lief’s time. I’ve known that for many days
now. There is nothing I could have done to prevent it. The important thing is that they
met their fates in a way we could all only hope to—with courage, with determination, and
with faith. If you wish to be angry with me, you have the right, but don’t diminish how
these two chose to meet their own end.”
“I don’t understand any of this,” Ryson admitted in an angry response.
He could not continue. The sadness in his being was suddenly overwhelmed by a
familiar feeling, a feeling that was much larger in intensity than it had ever been in the
past. The dryness he had felt many time before washed over him in waves. It dove into
his core just as it flushed him of every emotion. This time, the sensation did not just
vanish. It stayed with the delver and it pointed out a being of great power that was now
laughing with hysteria.
Enin did not even have to ask. His own link to the magic allowed him insight into
what Ryson was sensing. The wizard’s own spirit grew cold at that which was unfolding
before him. He had now realized that while he had indeed been using balance as an
excuse, that didn’t mean the concept didn’t exist. He knew the equilibrium had just
shifted.
“Baannat,” Enin whispered. He quickly moved toward Holli and placed a hand upon
her forehead. He concentrated on opening a connection with the elf and let a fraction of
his own energy flow into her. It was enough to restore her.
“You should be able to walk now,” Enin stated.
“What’s going on?” Holli questioned.
“I’m not completely sure, but I would venture to guess that the magical energy that
once was Tabris now belongs to Baannat. Magical energy is never extinguished. It is cast
out in spells and then it is absorbed once more. He must have known what was going on
here and waited for Tabris’ end. When she died, all of the energy that was hers became
his. I’m afraid he has used this cataclysmic event not only to steal her energy but to
expand his own capabilities. If I’m correct, he is now much more powerful than before.”
“Is this Baannat the one that’s basically your equal in power?” Ryson asked as he
slowly walked over to the two.
“Yes,” Enin answered solemnly. “Unfortunately, this leads to a greater problem. A
problem I have been doing all I can to avoid, but I’m not going to avoid it any further.”
“What is it you are going to do?” Holli asked.
“What must be done. In truth, I had already made my decision before I came here to
you. You were right, Holli. While balance is important, it must never be used as an
excuse, or as something to hide behind. And that is certainly what I have been doing. A
greater threat now exists, and it’s a threat that must be dealt with.”
“You just said he is much more powerful than before,” Holli noted. “Is he now more
powerful than you?”
“If I am correct about what happened here, then yes, I would bet he is.”
“Can you defeat him?”
“It is not my destiny to defeat him,” Enin stated firmly. He took a moment to look into
Ryson’s being and simply nodded his head. “But I believe I can weaken him, and I must
at least make that attempt. If I don’t try, I would not be able to live with myself. I have
been fearful for too long.”
“Hold on here,” Ryson demanded. “What are you talking about? Now all of a sudden
you want to act? You’re almost sounding like Lief and that’s about as far an opposite as
you can get from what you have been saying all along.”
Enin frowned. “The truth is we were both wrong. Lief would go too far, and I would
not go far enough. The best solution is as it always is, somewhere in the middle. Balance.
The very concept I’ve been using as an excuse not to act, it the very thing I now
understand.”
“So you’re going to fight another wizard because you think he is evil?” Ryson
pressed. “That doesn’t sound like balance.”
Enin sighed. “I have made many mistakes. I guess that proves I’m still human, and
that in itself is a bit of relief to me. I suppose I had to go through this. I was given a gift
of so much power, but I still have all the failings I had before. It’s still possible for me to
lose my courage, even my faith. The important thing to remember is that even something
that is lost can be found. Mistakes are made. It’s how we learn. Anyway, the truth is I
now see things clearer. You came here to stop Tabris because she was ultimately
responsible for what happened in Connel. That is only partially true. She certainly shared
in the responsibility, but now I can sense there was another hand shaping events.”
“Baannat?” Holli wondered aloud.
Enin nodded.
“So he is responsible,” the elf stated with no true surprise.
“I don’t know how he hid it from me, but it is clear to me now.”
“If you know you can’t defeat him, then why will you do this?” Holli demanded.
“For the very reasons you came here,” Enin responded. “I will have no regrets about
what I must do this night. I understand things better now. I hope you can also understand.
Destiny can’t be stopped, but it can be slowed or sped up. We will turn things faster
today, so to speak. I think we already have. Things that might have waited, no longer
can.” He paused only for a moment, wondering if he should say what he wanted to. In the
end, he decided to speak freely about what he was about to do and let the events play out
without deception or denial. He looked toward both Ryson and Holli. “What I do, I have
decided to do. What Linda does, is up to Linda. What you do, is up to you. Destiny and
choice, they can indeed go hand in hand.”
With this, Ryson found concern exploding in his chest. “What do you mean Linda?
What does she have to do with this?”
“She must decide that for herself.” It was all Enin said before he disappeared.

Enin appeared outside the door of the Borderline Inn. He stepped quickly inside and
moved to the bar that Linda was tending. It was very late, near closing and only a few
patrons sat scattered about the room. It was a slow night anyway with most of the guard
out of Burbon and involved in the attack on Connel. Linda was just about to begin
closing up the bar when Enin called for her attention.
“You and I have to speak in private, we must do it quickly,” he said with a graveness
Linda was not used to.
Without hesitating, she directed him back behind the bar and to a small storage room
filled with mugs, plates, and other assorted items used during the inn’s daily activities.
With a look into the wizard’s face, Linda quickly assumed something terrible had
happened, and she imagined the worst.
“What is it? Is Ryson alright, did something happen to him?’
“Ryson is fine,” Enin began, “but he is the reason for my coming to you. The truth of
the matter is that so much has already happened this evening. Eventually, you will come
to learn all the details, but there isn’t enough time for that now. What you need to know is
that Connel has been freed and Tabris is no longer a threat. In fact, she is no longer alive.
Your Ryson and Holli are alive and well in the Lacobian Desert, but I am afraid two of
Ryson’s close friends have also past. Lief and the Reader Matthew from Connel died in
the battle with Tabris.”
Linda found herself very torn at this moment and her head swam with the confusion of
opposing emotions. She could not understand how Ryson became involved in a battle
with Tabris in the Lacobian Desert. She knew this night was critical for many that called
Burbon home, and the last six days moved at a snail’s pace for her and everyone else that
had a loved one in the town guard. Still, she only believed Ryson would be working to
evacuate the people trapped in Connel. The thought of him fighting Tabris left her near
breathless. While she felt great relief to hear that he had survived the confrontation, she
also realized how the loss of his close friends must be affecting him at this very moment.
She also wondered what else he might be suffering from for fighting magic was not
something she could easily comprehend.
“You fought with Tabris?” she questioned after finally finding her voice. “I thought
they were going to Connel, not the desert. How did Ryson end up in the desert? Why did
he fight Tabris?”
“There will be time for greater explanations later,” Enin stated flatly.
“But I don’t understand…”
“I know you don’t, but this is not the time for that.”
“Can’t you bring Holli and Ryson back here now?” she asked as she realized Enin was
not about to explain much of what happened. She hoped if Ryson was here he could
explain and she in turn could try to comfort the delver during his time of loss.
“I can, but we don’t have the time for that either,” Enin admitted. “There is something
of great importance I must ask of you and it’s going to be hard to explain. It’s not
something you’re going to want to hear, but you must. You have a decision to make and
you need to know everything.”
“What’s going on?” Linda pleaded growing more frustrated with Enin.
Enin for his part leapt right to the area of his focus. He did not even attempt to guide
Linda slowly into what needed to be said. He breached the subject with all the subtlety of
a mountain shag at a sheep farm. “You once asked me what Ryson’s destiny was, what it
was I saw that allowed me to know that he would not fall at the hands of Tabris. I didn’t
tell you then, but I will tell you now. There is a magic caster, a dark creature—very
powerful. At this moment, he is now even more powerful than me. It is Ryson’s destiny
to face this creature.”
This news immediately and completely obliterated any relief Linda felt only moments
ago. “What are you talking about? Is this going to happen now?”
Enin frowned but did his best to explain. “I hope it will happen soon, but this is
beyond my control. This is more of a choice Ryson has to make. I can set the stage to a
degree, but how it plays out and when, I can not say.”
Linda now became visibly angry with the wizard’s answers and made as much clear to
him. “If it’s his choice, why does he have to face this creature?! And it sounds like you’re
trying to manipulate something. What is it you’re not telling me?!”
“I’m trying to tell you everything. It’s important that I hold nothing back from you,
but you’re really not giving me a chance.”
“Give you a chance? A chance for what? Ryson can’t face something like that! That’s
insane! This is exactly what I told you couldn’t happen, exactly why I asked you to tell
Tabris to stay away from him. Tabris is dead and you come to me and tell me that
something even more powerful than you is going to face Ryson. You can’t do this to
me!”
“It is not my doing, it is destiny.”
“Don’t hand me that, you just said he had a choice. If he has a choice, then it doesn’t
have to happen. You have to stop this!”
“Linda, calm yourself. I can’t stop it, but I intend to help him, and I am here to give
you the opportunity to help him as well, but you have to listen to me!”
“We…I can help him?” At that moment, Linda found the strength to calm her fears.
She took a deep breath as she waited for the wizard to finally offer some form of
explanation.
Enin took the opportunity to spell out the situation to the best of his abilities. “Yes, I
am sure you can help him, but only if you listen to me. The problem is you will not like
what you are going to hear. Baannat is the name of the magic caster. He is very evil. He
has manipulated many things in the past few days, of that I am now certain. He has done
this to grow powerful in magic and it looks like he has succeeded. For a while now, I
have known of his existence, and though I thought I was keeping him in check, I have
failed to do that. I have been hesitant to confront him, but I can no longer avoid that. I am
going to face him now and do everything in my power to weaken him. If I go alone, I
believe there is no way I can win. If you go with me, there is a great chance we can
succeed. That is the key, for it will give Ryson the ability to survive what he must face.”
“You want me to face this Baannat?” Linda asked with near amazement.
“Not exactly, I will battle Baannat, but you will serve as the shield. As we have talked
about this before and you showed great reluctance to admit it, you are immune to magic.
If I bring you to Baannat, I can use you as an anchor, a reference point for me to actually
cast spells to defeat him. Because the magic does not affect you in anyway, you will
allow me to be present in Baannat’s realm without really allowing myself to be
vulnerable to his attacks. It will seem to you as if I’m there, but I will not be in a physical
sense that would allow Baannat to use his magic on me. He will, however, be vulnerable
to what I can do.”
Linda found herself torn once more, this time between the opportunity to help Ryson
and the situation she would have to face. “So we’re going to go to this Baannat and I’m
going to be some sort barrier between you two? He won’t be able to get to you through
me, but you’ll be able to get to him?”
“That describes it fairly well. You will be the focal point between us. As long as you
remain conscious, he will not be able to get to me.”
“Conscious? I thought you said I was immune to the magic. Why is there a chance I
might become unconscious?”
Enin looked directly into Linda’s eyes and did his very best to make her aware of this
certainty. “This is very important and you must believe it to be true. Baannat will be
unable to hurt you physically in any way. He has created a realm for himself that consists
entirely of magic. You, however, are totally immune to magic. Everything he hurls at
you, you will cast aside. That one thing you must never forget. There is no way he can
cause you true harm. Because you will be in a place that is made of pure magic, he can’t
even attack you indirectly. But that does not mean you can let down your guard or not be
strong. He will undoubtedly recognize your immunity very quickly. At that point, your
true struggle will begin.
“He might have been able to deceive me, and for that I’m truly sorry, but I still know
him. There is only one thing he can do that will affect you, but it will not be real. Just like
me, he is strong in all facets of magic, which includes illusion. He can create things that
look real, sound real, even feel real, but they are not. No matter what you believe is
happening, you must not accept it. Everything your mind sees will be of his creation. It
will be fake, it will be a lie, but I don’t wish to lie to you, too. I believe he can create very
dark things and though they are not real, they might appear very real.”
“But you’re sure he can’t harm me?”
“Only if you let him. If your mind begins to believe the attacks are real, you will end
up descending into the darkness of your own fears. You will lose consciousness and then
he will be able to attack me. At that point, I would be in danger. Rest assured if that does
happen, I will make sure you are returned here, but I will not be so lucky.”
Linda grew silent and she turned away from the wizard to contemplate what was just
said to her. Enin offered a final explanation of why it was necessary.
“I want you to understand why I am here asking you to do this. There are two reasons.
You have a unique power, extremely unique. You are not simply resistant to magic, it is
much beyond that. You deflect it completely from your being. As long as you understand
that, then I am not putting you in any danger. With you there, I believe I can critically
weaken Baannat beyond his ability to mend himself. It is not my destiny to eliminate him
completely. As I said before, Ryson must face him. That is your delver’s destiny. For me,
I need to this. I need to move beyond the excuses I have made in the past and I have to do
what is right.
“The second reason is one that is much more personal to you. It is what I see and why
I feel obligated to make this offer to you. Your destiny is hard to define. You are meant to
be with Ryson and he is meant to be with you. It doesn’t take a wizard to see that. It is,
however, my plight to know that Ryson’s fate is to face this being. And that is where we
come to you. I can not see a destiny in you. Perhaps it’s because you have none at this
point, or maybe because you deflect the magic I simply can’t see it. When we last talked
of this, you said your destiny was to help Ryson. I also see, however, that you feel in
many ways unable to help him on your own. I believe you will know in your heart what
you are supposed to do. As it is my choice to face Baannat, I believe you deserve the
same opportunity to do what it is you believe is your own fate.
“It’s not going to be easy, and you must be sure of yourself or you will accomplish
nothing. But if you do believe this is what you must do, keep your strength and you mind
on your purpose, you will win. Of that, I have no doubt. You will also, however, carry
memories of what you will face for a very long time. They will not be pleasant. In the
end, it’s up to you, your choice.”
Linda turned and asked the one question she was afraid to hear the answer. “What if I
say no?”
“Then I will go alone. As I said, facing Baannat is now something I have to do. I have
been very good at coming up with reasons for why I shouldn’t act, why I shouldn’t help
others even when they are in great need. For the most part, they were excuses because I
was afraid. I really don’t wish to interfere in people’s lives, but I can’t use that anymore
to keep from doing what I should do. This creature is evil and he is very powerful, more
powerful now because I was so easily deceived and so willing not to take any action.
Many people have been hurt because of him, and many more are now in danger. All the
reasons I used to talk about for not getting involved now seem small in comparison. I
need to do this for myself, to makeup for what I have done. Maybe I will get lucky.
Maybe I can weaken him enough and still escape. If I do that, I will succeed in giving
Ryson a better chance.”
“If you can’t weaken him at all, can Ryson defeat this creature?”
“I can not say. The delver has a unique inner power and has already done much of
what I would have guessed impossible. But in all honesty, I don’t like his chances.”
“And if I do go with you and you accomplish what we set out to do, how do you know
Ryson will be able to defeat him?”
“Again, I don’t know for sure, but I know he will have a much better chance. We will
probably find out very shortly because I believe he will arrive in Baannat’s realm shortly
after we do.”
Here Linda became more than just concerned. A look of terror washed across her face
as she erupted back at Enin. “Ryson? You’re bringing him? You just said you didn’t
know when Ryson would have to face Baannat!”
“I don’t, but I believe I know him well enough to know what will happen. Before I left
him in the desert, I said you had a choice to make and nothing more. He is a delver. His
feelings for you and his own curiosity will force him to find out what I meant. I left him
with Holli. She knows where I am at all times and she will undoubtedly reveal as much to
Ryson. He will follow my trail here. If you decide not to go, his journey will end and he
will face Baannat at some point in the future. If you go with me, he will follow. Holli has
the ability to send him forward to where we will be. I made sure of that many days ago.”
“So if I go, then Ryson will end up right where I don’t want him, facing this Baannat
creature.”
“That is true, but if you think by saying no he will avoid that confrontation, you are
only fooling yourself. He will still have to face him eventually. If this happens now, he
will face Baannat with your help and mine. If he does it in the future, he will most
certainly do it alone.”
Linda pressed with one more question, a question that would determine her own final
answer. “I’m going to ask you one question that I want a simple and honest answer to. Is
there anyway for Ryson to avoid facing this Baannat?”
“No.”
Linda wished to be certain of this. “I need you to swear on all that you believe in that
that’s the truth.”
“I swear on everything I hold dear, Ryson will have to face Baannat. There is
absolutely no way to avoid it. I know it just as I knew Holli would come to me and ask to
be my guard. I know it just as I knew that Lief would die this day. I honestly don’t know
how I know these things, and part of me wishes I didn’t, but I do.”
Linda no longer hesitated in her decision. “Then my choice is that I will go with you
and I pray that you are right.”
Enin actually felt a wave of relief for he knew if he faced Baannat alone at this
moment, he would certainly die. With Linda, he had a chance. He was beyond grateful
for this, but he felt a greater need than ever before to alert her for what she would face.
“Before we go I must prepare you for what to expect. While Baannat has done his best to
hide his true being to me, there are things I do know for certain about him. Baannat is not
a creature natural to this land, nor is he a being of pure shadow. He is something in
between, or perhaps a mix of both. He has substance, but not the kind you and I are
familiar with. He is not made up of simple flesh and bone, but he does exist in our
physical plain and thus can be attacked as well as destroyed. He is very powerful, even
more so as a result of Tabris’ death. He has most certainly absorbed all of the energy she
once controlled. Just remember, no matter how much power and energy he now controls,
he can not physically harm you.”
“I’ll remember,” Linda said while trying to focus on that very thought. “So what do we
do now?”
“We go together to face him. I will cast a spell and you will find yourself in a place
that will appear to be shrouded in a white mist. You will eventually see Baannat. Ignore
everything else you see or hear from that point on. Simply concentrate on the fact that
you are immune to his power. We should not wait. If you are ready, we should go right
now.”
Linda nodded. “Let’s get this over with.”

Ryson felt two large gaping holes in his soul—one for the loss of Lief and one at the
death of the Reader Matthew. He did not wish to ignore their deaths, but the words of the
wizard left him unable to focus on little beyond his concern for Linda.
“What’s going on? What did he mean by saying Linda has a choice? Do you know?”
Ryson demanded of Holli.
Holli did not hesitate in answering. “I do not know for certain. There is nothing he has
spoken of which I can rely on to give you a complete answer.”
Ryson looked hard at the elf guard. “But you have spoken about Linda with Enin
before, haven’t you?”
“Yes.”
“About what?”
“She is immune to magic. It can not touch her in anyway. I’ve known of this since I
first met her. Enin also knows of this.”
Ryson took a few moments to consider this. “Enin said he had to deal with Baannat
before he left here. Enin said Baannat is now stronger with the magic, but you and Enin
have talked about how Linda is immune to it.” He stopped after that thought and looked
back toward Holli with dismay. “Do you know where Enin is now?”
Holli nodded. “He is at the Borderline Inn.”
“Godson! How fast can you get us there?”
“I can get us there as I brought us here, but I can not move as fast as he does. Enin
returned most of my energy, so I have the power to get us there far faster than if you had
to travel on your own.”
“Do it!”

Linda found herself in a place that was nearly beyond her comprehension. Pure
magical energy surrounded her, yet her body could not be touched by it. In the simplest
of terms, she was hovering in a state of tactile suspension. She simply floated in this
existence, but the sensation went well beyond any similarities to floating in water or even
in air. It was more like wafting in the merest sliver of space between the flame and
smoke, never feeling the heat but knowing it was there. The moment she was placed in
Baannat’s realm she lost all physical contact with everything around her. The feeling was
unnerving to her and she wrapped her arms around herself as if to confirm that her body
still existed.
She didn’t understand how she could move in such an environment for there was
nothing for her to stand upon or press a hand against. Still, she was able to turn about in
all directions and move forward and backward with steps that fell upon this all
encompassing emptiness. She somehow knew she was no longer in the same type of
existence as back home in Uton. Her body was here, but she was not dependent on the
same needs. She wondered if she could feel hot or cold, wet or dry, because at the
moment she felt nothing about her at all.
The sensation of touch seemed to be the only sense that was deprived of her. She
could see into the white haze as she made out two figures in the mist with her, and she
believed she could smell a strange, almost electric scent as if she stood in a smoldering
depression where lightning had just struck. She could hear as well, and she recoiled at the
sound of a bellowing, insane voice, the voice she knew to belong to Baannat.
Baannat spoke between vicious giggles of uncontrollable laughter, but his attention
was focused on the wizard who was also now present in this misty place. “Hello, Brother.
I was wondering if you were going to come here right away, or if you were going to wait
until I actually committed some act you viewed to be worthy of your attention. Since
you’ve shown up so fast, I imagine you’ve figured out that I now possess all of the
energy that used to belong to that pathetic tart of a witch from the desert. This can’t make
you happy.”
Enin gave a quick glance over to Linda to ensure her condition before responding. “I
am very aware that you have taken the power of Tabris. I am aware of many things now,
and so there was no need to wait.”
Baannat actually howled with delight. “And in being so newly aware, do you realize
what has truly been happening? Are you admitting how foolish you have been? I must
tell you, brother, I have been so amused by your antics. You kept coming here looking
for some kind of obvious clue, as if I was stupid enough to leave a clear trail for you to
follow. It was beyond entertaining to watch you looking for a direct link between me and
Tabris, or me and Sazar. How pathetic. Do you really think I would be that obvious? You
don’t always have to use magic directly to get someone to do what you want. Sometimes
all you have to do is set the stage for them, and they do it all on their own.”
“I realize you have been interfering all this time, and yes I admit my mistake,” Enin
replied without shame.
Baannat, however, wished to relish the point. “Do you know how easy it was to make
one of Sazar’s goblins walk through one of your stupid Pinesway web spells? And then
you kept talking to me about how your prized delver could sense me. I allowed that. It
was necessary to keep him focused on what I wanted him focused on. When you knew
Sazar was attacking Pinesway, I wanted the delver interested in this as well. I wanted him
to spoil the serp’s plans, which is exactly what he did. I even placed a river rogue in the
town long before all of that happened to entice that elf friend of his to show up just at the
right time. With Sazar defeated by the delver, it was simplicity to direct him to Tabris.
Sazar was destined to grow in power. You’re not the only one that can see fate, brother. I
just know how to use it.”
“And that will be your undoing,” Enin said firmly. “Destiny is for the purpose of the
individual that it belongs to. It is for him or her to experience, to learn, to grow. It is not
for you to exploit.”
“And yet I did anyway,” Baannat countered. “Do you still not understand? I needed
Tabris to choose a path opposed to you so that her energy could also grow in opposition. I
needed her to join with Sazar so that she could be the source of his new power. Once he
became a sufficient threat, it was clear he would bring other forces down against him and
his ultimate defeat. But I knew it would not end there. Those that fought Sazar would
then focus on Tabris and ultimately she would fall as well. When she did, I was waiting
to grab everything she had. All of that loose energy just there for the taking. I have it
now, just like I wanted.”
“It was not Tabris’ destiny to become evil,” Enin shot back. “That was her choice.
You may have benefited by it, but you were simply lucky. Remember, luck can be
changed.”
“So you do not wish to give me proper credit?” Baannat asked.
“Credit? For Tabris’ ill-advised decision? No, you earn no credit there. She made that
choice of her own will and she has faced the consequences of that act.”
“And now are you here to tell me of the consequences I face?” Baannat chided the
wizard.
“No, I am here because of my own choice, of my own decision. Your action did not
bring me here on its own. In the end, I realized I would no longer try to hide from what I
am, just as you hide in the shadows of your mist.”
“You think I hide from you?” Baannat seethed with hate. “I used the mist to cover
myself only so that it would continue to confuse you. It was part of the game and nothing
more. The game is coming to an end, so I will indulge you and let you see me for what I
am.”
Baannat’s figure seemed to almost solidify out of the misty white shadows that
covered him. His full features came into focus just as his angry growls turned once more
into a maniacal laugh. The long thing fangs that jutted from his cat-like muzzle glistened
in the clearing mist. He stood on hind legs that were curved deeply and bent on two
separate joints, but his arms were long and straight. His hands were like the thick heavy
paws of a tiger with thin razor claws. His eyes glowed green with deep black irises, and
bent whiskers drooped from the balloon like cheeks that extended his muzzle. His body,
however, did not match the cat-like appearance of the rest of him. A dark brown cloak
covered a twisted, shifting mass. There appeared to be no solidity to his center, as if his
shoulders, chest, back, and pelvis were made of nothing more than melting taffy. His core
trembled with waves from each cackle, like the surface of a pond disturbed by the
churning oars of several boats.
“Is this supposed to frighten me?” Enin asked without a hint of surprise. “I’ve
suspected all along that you were nothing more than a slink ghoul. You could shadow
your form, but you could never truly hide your basic instincts. Each time we talked I
sensed more of what you were. I have enough of an understanding of the dark realm to
know the kind of creatures that are spawned there.”
“Congratulations,” Baannat answered sarcastically. “You should also know that my
physical prowess exceeds yours. You can not match me in magic and now you can be
assured you can not match me in physical battle.”
“If it’s that simple, why don’t you just get rid of me once and for all?” Enin dared the
dark creature. “Use your new found magical advantage to obliterate me, or show me the
strength in your arms and the sharpness of your claws and kill me with one quick strike.”
“If I wanted to, rest assured you would be dead already,” Baannat answered with a
twisted grin that wrinkled his whiskers even further. “You’ve always amused me and I
like being amused.”
“The time for your entertainment is coming to an end. I have come here so that one
way or another, this will be our last encounter.”
“But once again you did not come alone.” Baannat took a quick glimpse over at Linda.
He did not recognize her, and that bothered him greatly. Still, he sensed no great magical
energy in this woman and he scoffed at her presence. “I am surprised, however, that you
bring this human with you. I expected the elf you’ve been training. I would have bet you
might have thought the elf’s assistance might have leveled out the imbalance that now
exists between us. You would have been wrong, but that was my guess.”
“It does not matter who I bring,” Enin responded hoping to keep Baannat’s attention
on him and away from Linda. “I am the one that will bring you to an end.”
“You? I thought it was the delver that was supposed to take care of me? What
happened to his destiny?”
Enin did not wish to discuss Ryson, especially in front of Linda, and he turned the
conversation back at his nemesis. “You were the one that scoffed at that destiny. You
even came out and told me I would have to face you eventually. As it turns out, you were
right. I do have to face you. It seems you know my fate better than I.”
“It is not your fate to just to face me,” Baannat giggled. “It is your fate to die by my
hands.”
“I do not think so, Baannat. Although I am not gifted enough to see my own destiny, I
do not feel that it is yet my time. If anything, I feel more alive then I have in a very long
time. For too long I have constrained myself, not daring to truly test my powers.”
“This will be no test,” Baannat growled with bitter hate. “No simple game this time as
we have played in the past.”
“Indeed, all the games are over, even the one I’ve played with myself,” Enin admitted
freely. “I’ve lived much too carefully and not taken my own advice. I have a choice just
like the others in this existence. I choose not simply to be a bystander. I will not allow
you to get away with what you have done. Many have suffered needlessly just so you
could obtain the power you craved. I choose not to be afraid. The power that has been
gifted to me is great and I have been hesitant to use it. I’ve worried about becoming too
involved and excused my inaction by convincing myself it would only be interference in
the lives of others. I know now that was only weakness on my part. Most of all, I choose
to use my gift to help others. Right now I can think of nothing I could do more to help
this land than to rid it of you.”
Baannat was about to laugh, but he turned his head and snuck another glance toward
Linda. “You seem almost confident you can beat me. At the same time, you know I am
now more powerful than you. Why is that?”
“The elf that I am training once told me that the battle doesn’t always go to the
strongest,” Enin replied.
“That is true.” Baannat admitted while continuing to glare at Linda’s form in the
swirling mist. “Some times it goes to the better prepared. How have you prepared for me
in such a short time, and what does this woman have to do with it?”
“I’m sure you’ll figure that out eventually,” Enin offered without giving further
details. “Until then there are some spells of my own that I’ve always wanted to try. I
wouldn’t dare back at my home as I might obliterate the town I live in. But I’m not really
too concerned if that happens here, so I guess I’m free to give them a try.”
Baannat heard Enin’s words but his attention was now fully on Linda. Enin took
advantage of the opportunity. He placed his hands far apart, extending both arms across
their full width. He mouthed a few words and two snow white rings appeared near his
hands, one at each palm. He quickly threw his arms together, clapping his hands and the
rings together with great force directly in front of him. The white magic exploded into
thousands of tiny jagged stars all about the size of a fingernail. They shot toward Baannat
with great velocity, so fast in fact, they appeared like small lightning bolts darting
through the space between them.
Baannat did not have time to cast a counter spell and the vast majority of the shrapnel
imbedded itself into his body. He growled in pain, but then shouted a spell of his own.
Two white hot circles dropped about his body and began to swirl around him. The jagged
pieces of magic shards began to melt into his body. He quickly turned his own hands
toward Enin. The circles of magic then rode down his extended arms and unfurled into
two long spears. The pulsating javelins flew toward the wizard but they made no impact.
They passed right through him as if he was not there. Baannat understood almost
immediately.
“You are a coward and a fool!” Baannat screamed. “You chose to split your being and
hide behind this woman in the walkway of existence as she exposes herself. But you can
only use her to reach me as long as she lives, and that ends now.”
Baannat cast another spell and the two white circles that encircled his arms erupted
into cascading flames that burst over Linda’s entire body. He let the flames roar into an
inferno until Linda’s body was no longer visible through the white plasma that now
surrounded her. When he ended the spell, this time Baannat could not fathom what he
saw.
“She lives? What games are you playing, brother? Are you wasting your energy
shielding her against my power? You could not hope to continue such folly for long.”
Throwing his arms in the air, Baannat called for another spell and this time a wave of
energy exploded from over his head. It rushed toward Linda like a tidal wave of immense
proportions. It flooded his intended target with such fury that the very mist that made up
this realm shook with violence. Once more, Baannat was left gaping in disbelief at what
he saw.
Enin took advantage of Baannat’s dismay and hurled his own magical spell at the
demon. He waved a single hand in a ring over his head and a large circular blade
appeared with hundreds of razor sharp teeth at its edges. It spun with near unfathomable
speed and Enin hurled it at the slink ghoul with all his power. The blade sunk deep into
Baannat and exploded at his core just as the ghoul roared with anger and frustration.
“This can not be!” Baannat screamed. “You should not have the energy to defend this
woman and still attack me with such power. Unless…”
Baannat waved his hands and called for a force barrier to protect him from further
onslaughts from Enin. He then turned to Linda and whispered a simple spell of light. A
small beam of yellow broke through the misty fog, but it would not shine upon Linda.
Baannat started to laugh again which quickly turned to an angry bellow. “You found
one that is immune! That explains it all. She has agreed to assist you and so you can use
her as both a shield and an anchor.”
“Now I suppose you are deserving of congratulations,” Enin mocked the dark spell
caster.
“And how long do you think I would allow this to continue?” Baannat challenged. “I
can not harm her with magic, but I do not need magic to kill her. She is a human and easy
prey for me. Once she is gone, you will have to face me on your own.”
Linda felt more than a twinge of fear as she saw Baannat’s eyes focus on her with evil
intent. As he crouched down with spit cascading through angry snarls, she felt more
vulnerable than she ever had before. Even when she saw the magic flame or the tidal
wave rush toward her, instinctively she knew it could not harm her. Now, however, she
was no longer certain if she was truly safe.
The claws sprung out of Baannat’s fingertips as he leapt toward Linda and she braced
herself for searing hot pain. It never came. When Baannat got within reach of her, a burst
of energy exploded between him and Linda and flung him backward like a rag doll tossed
from a baby’s crib.
“Did you think I would actually take the chance of sending her here without physical
protection?” Enin asked. “I told you I knew what you were. Of course I also knew it was
only a matter of time before you tried that. She is well shielded against physical attacks.”
Baannat roared with anger. “You have not the power to shield her and attack me as
you have! What trickery is this?!”
“Come now, Baannat,” Enin ridiculed his nemesis. “Think about it. Do I have to really
spell it out for you? The shield does not require more than a fraction of energy. I only
have to use enough of my magic to protect her from you physically, not magically. She is
her own protection against magic. The truth of the matter is you are doomed.”
Flailing his arms in swinging motions at his sides, the wizard sent a spell of a
windspin toward his opponent. A small tornado of fierce power struck at the ghoul, but it
disintegrated in a blaze of cackling energy.
Spitting toward the wizard now, Baannat made his own proclamation of the situation.
“You are still weaker than I am. Even if I can’t harm the woman, I can protect myself
from your attacks. The shield I now wear will cancel any spell you cast and I can wait
until she tires. She can not stay like this forever. Eventually she will need rest. I only
need patience now.”
“Patience would work if I allowed you the time,” Enin countered. Utilizing his
greatest effort, the wizard placed all of his focus on a spell of pure power. He threw his
hands outward as he whispered words of a higher level of consciousness. He embraced
the borders between existence, between light and dark, life and death, good and evil. He
allowed the thin layer of separation between these concepts to grow into a greater
magnitude of enlightenment. Black magic was that energy fueled of change and it could
become a spell of ultimate power. Spinning his palms outward, he centered this bolt of
pure force directly at Baannat’s being.
A thick shadow engulfed the ghoul and though it could not touch him through the
slink ghoul’s own shield, it battered the very essence of his energy. Baannat could feel
the very fabric of his power being decimated by the endless turmoil inherent in Enin’s
spell. Such was the strength of this one spell that the demon quickly realized his own
existence might actually be in peril.
“You insane fool!” the ghoul cried out. “I can deflect your spell, but not indefinitely.
The cataclysm of our two powers absorbing each other will deteriorate us both.”
“Is this supposed to stop me?” Enin demanded. “I came here to weaken you, and I will
succeed, even if it costs all that I am.”
“I will not allow this!”
“You have little choice. You can’t attack me as long as I remain out of your reach. I,
however, can assault you as long as I use my friend as the conduit she has now become.
She serves now as both a shield and the sword against you.”
“Then I will remove her at all costs!”

After what felt like an eternity to Ryson, he and Holli finally appeared at the front of
the Borderline Inn. The streets were dark and empty, but a few lights burned within the
tavern. He raced through the door hoping to find Linda behind the bar. He saw no one.
No customers, no Enin, no Linda.
“Linda?!” the delver called out as he raced through the back rooms and kitchen.
Again, he found no one.
“The door wasn’t locked, but no one’s here,” he said more to himself then to Holli
who had now entered the main room of the establishment. “She usually locks up, so she
should still be here.”
Holli took a long moment to make her own assessment of the room and realizing the
inevitable, she reached out with her feelings to locate the wizard.
“She is gone. We are too late.”
Ryson turned with both dread and fury toward the elf. “What do you mean?!”
“Enin is no longer here, no longer in this plane of existence. He is with Baannat but
not completely. He is somewhere between the two realms, but his consciousness is
certainly focused on the evil creature, of that I’m sure. There’s only one way he could
accomplish that. He would need an anchor point. Someone would have to be in Baannat’s
realm that is allowing him to make contact with the creature. It has to be Linda. She is
immune to the magic, so Baannat must be unable to attack her.”
“You have to stop this!” Ryson demanded. “If you know where he is, you can tell him
to send Linda out of there!”
“I don’t believe I could get that message to him,” Holli revealed.
“Try!”
Holli nodded as she closed her eyes. She focused on her link with Enin and made
every possible effort to create a line of communication. With every ounce of her
consciousness, she tried to force her thoughts through space and time to reach the wizard.
Nothing.
“I can not reach him.”
“This is insane! Linda can’t survive this. We have to do something.”
“What can we do? It is not like they are just outside this inn. They are beyond us.”
This one comment leapt out at Ryson and gave him hope. “Are they? Are they beyond
us, Holli?”
“What do you mean?”
“You can reach them, can’t you? You can cast a spell that would bring us to Baannat’s
realm. You know how to get there.”
“I would be putting you in great danger. This is not like fighting a shag or an army of
goblins. This creature is immensely powerful.”
“I can’t just let Linda be in there alone.”
“She is immune to the magic, you are not.”
“I don’t care. I have to be there.”
Holli hesitated for only a moment and then through the line of communication she had
tried to forge only moments ago, she got her response from Enin.
Send him! Alone!

Keeping his own magical shield intact to fend off Enin’s attack, Baannat garnered the
remainder of his energy to focus on Linda. The white circles of power rotated over his
head as he whispered words of ancient evil. The white magic turned gray and though it
could not touch Linda it began to swirl around her.
Shadows grew in the pale misty fog. They spun in all directions and the twisting spin
of gray made Linda even more unsteady in her surroundings. Slowly, the gloomy chaos
around her began to take actual shape and form. More color became prevalent as Linda
witnessed the insipid haze dissipate into clear horizons. Three very different
environments came into focus—one of a barren desert, one of a mountain top, and one of
a lush forest. The three scenes continued to sway around her, shifting and changing their
location relative to her own position. With each moment that past, the detail of each place
grew more vibrant and very soon each came alive with moving nightmares of terror.
In the desert scene that flashed before her, she saw an army of mutated insects
swarming toward her. The bright sun highlighted their sickening features as they skittered
over gritty, dry rock. The swarm included insects she thought she knew and horrid
creatures she could not describe. They flew, they crawled, they leapt, and they slithered
forward in a sickening motion of unorganized chaos. Almost immediately, they were
upon her, and just as she could actually feel the hot sun baking her skin, she experienced
the painful bite of misshapen ants and piercing sting of scorpions. Her flesh felt as if it
was going to disintegrate away in this agonizing attack.
Just at nearly every insect had reached her body, the desert scene washed away into
the background and she found herself upon the side of the mountain with its peak at the
forefront of her vision. The ground was steep and rugged. There were no trees, only rocks
of varying size. At the start, all was peaceful and she felt a wave relief from the removal
of the insects. Her relief would not last as the peace and tranquility were immediately
shattered by a thunderous explosion. The ground beneath her split and it seemed as if her
body fell into a wide fissure.
She did not sink below the surface. Linda’s arms, chest and head remained above the
ground, but her legs and hips were below the surface and she could not pull herself free.
The echo of the blast faded in her ears, but the thunder returned in a rolling, swelling tide
that grew louder with each passing moment. She looked up to the peak of the mountain
and saw a swirling cloud of brown dust coming right for her.
At first her cheeks were stung by the impact of small pointy rocks and pebbles. The
dust seemed to swallow her entire body and she coughed at the taste of dirt and debris in
her mouth. Soon the sting on her face turned to much harder collisions of hand-sized
stones that bounced down from the mountain and struck her arms and chest. She felt as if
she was being beaten to death by a thousand angry fists that struck all about her upper
body.
Soon after, she felt pressure increase on her legs and waist. She looked down into the
fissure and realized it was filling quickly with dust and dirt. Now, she felt the bottom half
of her body being crushed but she could not pull herself free. The rocks and dirt began to
accumulate around her middle. The pile of debris continued to rise up her chest. Soon her
arms were completely buried just as the top of the mound reached her chin. She tried to
scream but could only cough out a cry. The dust began to fill her mouth as she was
drowning in dirt.
Once more, the scenes shifted. The mountain faded away into a forest of lush green.
Linda’s body fell limp as she felt the pressure of the dirt freed from her body. The
overwhelming swing of sensations, however, left her grasping for breath. Terror gripped
her mind as she peered into the trees around her and wondered what waited for her here.
She would not have to wait long for an answer.
The trees themselves bent down over her. Thick, wooden branches wrapped around
her arms and legs and pulled her high into the air. In the blink of an eye, she went from
the forest floor to a point well above the surrounding treetops as several tree limbs
stretched high into a deep blue sky. She looked down in sheer terror, realizing a fall from
the distance would leave her body crushed and broken.
The tree limbs that held her aloft began to swing and sway in an uneven pitch. As the
horizon appeared to roll back and forth all about her, Linda began to feel queasy in her
stomach. The fact that she had no control over her own motion and that all of this
movement occurred apparently high above everything else did little to calm the sickness
growing within her. She tried to shut her eyes to the tumultuous scene, but every time she
did, she heard the crackling snap of branches below her. Her growing fear of falling
forced her to reopen her eyes to ensure the branches that held her remained intact.
Enin continued to press his spell upon Baannat, but he stole a glance toward Linda and
realized her mind was under the assault of an illusion. He could see the torture painted on
her face as tears streamed down her cheeks. He watched as she opened her mouth over
and over again to scream only to clamp her jaw shut before she could make a sound.
“Linda!” Enin shouted out. “What you see is not real! It is an illusion in the space
around you. He can’t hurt you physically, but he can alter the appearance of your
surroundings. Whatever you think is happening to you is only in your mind. Magic can
not touch you, but that doesn’t mean you can’t see it. But whatever surrounds you is only
a shadow of a false image.”
Linda could hear Enin’s words, but only barely. The limbs had dropped her and she
was falling through the air at tremendous speed. First, she broke through the top branches
of the surrounding trees and the leaves and thin branches split and ripped as her body
plummeted past them. She then passed into the thicker limbs and these would not bend or
break. Her body bounced off of these with heavy thuds. Back and forth, left and right, she
tumbled through the thick branches like a ball being swatted by a thousand paddles. Very
quickly, she could no longer focus on which direction was up or down. She believed the
ground was close and she wondered how long it would take before she met the bone
crushing impact and how it would feel.
With that thought and with Enin’s words ringing in her mind, she grabbed on to a
substantial realization. Although she believed she could feel the crack of the limbs
against her body just as she felt the sting of the insects that attacked her or the impact of
the rocks battering her body, it no longer made sense. Had she truly fallen from that
height and struck so many tree limbs, she would have already been torn apart and
unconscious. Her arms and legs would be broken and paralyzed and yet she could still
wave them within this downward fall.
“I haven’t hit anything!” she screamed. “I’m not even falling.”
She shut her eyes again and this time kept them closed despite what she thought she
heard. She focused on a spot of inky blackness and let it expand across her mind. She
blocked out all other sensations, she even hummed to herself to help drown out the
sounds of the illusion. Slowly, the sensation of falling faded away and she found herself
rooted in the same suspended position she was in when she was first brought to this
place.
“That’s it!” Enin shouted again. “Take hold of your reality. He can not hurt you! Keep
telling yourself that.”
At that very moment, Ryson appeared in the same misty paleness of this place. With
his first appearance, he found himself overwhelmed with the environment. He could see,
but only three figures. Everything else was nothing more than a misty fog. He could hear,
but the sounds he was so used to were absent. There were no voices in the background,
no insects buzzing or animal calls off in the distance, no rushing sound of the wind or
running water of a far away river or stream. He could smell but again the ever present
scents of Uton were gone. They were replaced with the unequivocal smell of the magical
energy. He could move, but without anything around him to act as a marker, he could not
judge how fast he was moving.
The senses of a delver were all much more receptive than a human or even an elf. In
this place, Ryson’s senses were completely awash with the extraordinary. Just as Linda
had to block out the illusions that assaulted her to regain her sense of reality, Ryson now
had to readjust his own senses so that they might cope with the complete strangeness of
these surroundings. As he focused on what he could see, he placed all of his attention on
Linda and in her he found an anchor for his own consciousness.
“Linda, are you alright?” the delver called out.
Linda heard his voice and at first wondered if it might be another mind attack by
Baannat. Still, she could not resist and opened her eyes. The three scenes of shadowy
illusion still swayed all about her. She focused all of her energy on brushing these images
aside and peering into what was really there.
“Ryson?” Linda replied. “Where are you?”
“I’m over here.”
She focused on the sound of his voice and slowly his body came into view. She felt at
first a wave of relief to see him, but then it turned to a shiver of fear as a new scene
appeared around the delver. It included monsters and dark creatures beyond her ability to
describe and they stalked her love with hateful intentions.
Enin realized at once that the true moment of fate for all of them had now arrived.
None of them could afford to be weak.
“Not now!” the wizard demanded. “The two of you must face your foe! Linda clear
your mind and remember what you see is not real. Ryson, if you wish to save Linda you
must defeat Baannat. Otherwise, we all die here now!”
Ryson saw the look of terror on Linda’s face but also sensed an immediate danger
behind him. Regardless of that danger, he wished to run toward Linda and help her, and
an overwhelming instinct brought his hand to the hilt of the Sword of Decree. As he
pulled the blade free, an understanding of what he faced in this place came across him
with unerring force. The blade did not glow, for in this place there was no natural light of
the sun or the stars. Still, the weapon remained a magical talisman and it held the power
to reveal an all encompassing knowledge of a certain time or event. The sword gifted
Ryson with the understanding that Baannat was causing Linda’s terror and the dark
magic-caster was the true threat to them all.
Swirling about and facing the slink ghoul, Ryson growled with authority. “Leave her
alone!”
Enin continued to focus on his spell that was draining the magical power from both
him and Baannat. His own energy was pouring into the power of the attack just as the
ghoul’s magical energy was being drained by the defensive shield. Even with that, he
knew his own level of power remained very high and thus Baannat’s would be even
greater still. He allowed himself a moment to yell a warning to the delver.
“He is still very powerful and very dangerous, Ryson! Be careful!”
Baannat seethed with hate and scorn. “So this is the precious delver that is so special.
Tell me, brother, what should I do with him? Should I blast him into a thousand pieces or
burn him into a cinder?”
Ryson said nothing, he only steadied himself for an attack. He bounced evenly on the
balls of his feet as he did everything in his power to attune himself to the strange realm he
now stood. He held the sword in front of him with both hands just below the hilt and he
prepared to move in any and all directions.
“Neither of you answer?” Baannat screamed. “Then I will decide myself.”
Baannat mouthed a few words strange to Ryson’s ears and then threw his arms toward
the delver. Two pure white rings of power erupted from the ghoul’s fingertips and shot
out toward Ryson like shock waves from some massive explosion. The force blast moved
with such speed it created its own rumble of thunder.
Even being prepared for any attack, Ryson was surprised with the speed of the assault.
He leapt as high as he could at the very last possible instant and avoided the blast by the
thinnest of hairs. The concussion of the explosion nearly sent him tumbling head over
heels as he landed, but he caught his balance and danced away to Baannat’s side.
Enin found this more than unsettling. That strike was simply too close and he knew
that Baannat had great reserves of power. Ryson would not be able to dodge each spell
for long. It would only take a matter of time before Baannat figured out how to offset the
delver’s speed. If he managed to strike Ryson with a spell, the results would be beyond
cataclysmic. Linda would see Ryson fall and she herself would spiral into the chaos of
Baannat’s illusions. Everything they had gained to this moment would be lost. He had to
do something more to help the delver survive.
As if blessed by divine inspiration, Enin immediately thought of a way to assist the
delver without tipping his strategy to the dark ghoul.
“Ryson, do you remember how to fly?” Enin yelled out quickly.
Ryson kept his focus on Baannat but shouted back his own reply. “How to what?
What are you talking about?”
“To fly! Do you remember how to fly?” Enin insisted.
And in that moment, Ryson understood. “Yes!”
Enin restrained his assaulting spell just long enough to cast a new spell toward the
delver. He focused on the exact spell he had cast back in Dark Spruce Forest that allowed
Ryson to enjoy the sensation of flying, but this time he would make the spell last
indefinitely. Just as two rings of white magical energy spun about his wrists, he threw his
arms forward directly at the delver, and the two circles of power twisted outward.
Ryson saw the spell coming toward him, and unlike his reaction to Baannat’s spell, he
raced toward this one. He allowed the energy to strike him at his center. As Enin’s energy
hit the delver, the air shimmered about him and everything in this realm slowed to a
snail’s pace to the delver’s perception. Ryson spun about and watched as the slink ghoul
moved as if encased in molasses. Each turn of Baannat’s hand, every thrust of his arm
appeared as if caught in a dream of slow motion.
Disregarding Enin’s spell, Baannat could not understand what had happened, and he
did not care. He focused the fury of his power on the delver, knowing that if he could
defeat him he could finally turn the battle in his own favor. He cast spell after spell, firing
flames and bolts of sheer energy in nearly every direction. The ghoul held little back and
plastered the entire area with spells of devastation. His realm shook with the ferocity of
his attack as he showered every inch of space with spells of vicious intent.
Ryson, however, moved with uncanny speed, quickness well beyond that of even a
full-bred delver. And it was not just speed with which he moved. He leapt and danced
away from danger as if he knew ahead of time where a spell would explode. With his
augmented perception, he watched the very fabric of Baannat’s spells unfold as if
restrained by an unseen hand. Even as each spell exploded around him, Ryson maintained
an awareness that far surpassed anything that the dark ghoul might possibly anticipate.
For the delver, dodging these blasts of power was nothing more than dodging feathers
being cast at him by a slow breeze.
For his part, Enin returned his focus to his own spell. The constant discharge of the
black facet of magic, the power of change, began to diminish his own vast reserves. He
actually began to feel empty as the energy within him began to decline. Although
Baannat now exceeded him in power, the ghoul was also expending much more magical
energy. Both of them would soon reach a point where they would actually face the
prospect of exhausting themselves.
Baannat, however, appeared unfazed by the sheer volume of energy he was
expending. Instead, he seemed bent on destroying the delver and infuriated with each
failure. Frustration was growing within him and this simply spurred on the use of even
more of his power. He continued to cast spell after spell as if he could not believe the
delver could possibly survive another instant. When the ghoul watched in disbelief as
Ryson simply dodged every assault, he raged on with even more spells.
Even as this pale realm of pure magic erupted with raging assaults, no one within it
was touched by any of Baannat’s wrath. The delver outmaneuvered every spell, Linda
was immune to the magic, and Enin simply was not physically there. The fury of the
ghoul washed over empty space and the cast magic began to spread out into the
emptiness of this place.
Realizing that vast amounts of loose magical energy was now expanding the borders
of Baannat’s creation, Enin made one last gamble to end the threat of the evil magic
caster. The wizard ended his own spell of attack and turned his attention to the
dimensional properties of this environment. He called on his understanding of existence
and cast a new spell that would open a rift in this place. A gateway to a dark plane
opened at the very heart of this realm and the pale mist began to gravitate to the fissure. It
seemed almost as if the very essence of Baannat’s sanctuary was now being consumed.
Enin called out one last time to Ryson. “Do not let him escape through the rift. He can
not transport himself away without taking all of us with him. This place we are in is
bound to him. He can, however, escape through the gateway.”
“Then why did you open it?!” Ryson shot back angrily.
“You will see,” was Enin’s only reply.
Almost as if on cue, a wave of dark creatures beyond Ryson’s imagination bounded
through the hole that Enin had opened. Monsters of every size swarmed into the pale
space. They ignored Ryson, Linda, and Enin, but they set upon Baannat with ravenous
hunger. The tore at the ghoul—bit and clawed at every opening. With each swipe, with
each bite, they stole more and more of Baannat’s power.
“No!” the ghoul screamed. The dark wizard attempted to make a path to the rift. He
pushed aside those monsters that continued to crowd over him. With one massive burst of
energy, he cast them aside and raced through an open path to his one hope of escape.
Ryson would not allow it. He covered the space between them in less than a heartbeat
and stood defiantly between the ghoul and the gateway. He held his sword in front of him
to block any attack.
Sneering and spitting, the ghoul’s eyes narrowed on the delver with hatred. “You will
let me pass. I will kill you all. I will kill you, the woman, and finally the wizard.”
Ryson responded with a swing of the Sword of Decree. The enchanted weapon sliced
through the air and then through Baannat’s malleable midsection. The ghoul was cleaved
in half.
The dark creatures that had entered this realm fell upon the remains further tearing the
ghoul into shreds and feeding on the torn pieces. When there was nothing left, they leapt
back into the rift and out of sight.
Staring into the fissure, Ryson viewed a land beyond description. For the first time in
his life, he witnessed something completely foreign and felt no desire whatsoever to
explore. He turned away as fast as he could.
With the realm they stood in now shuttering as if ready to break apart, Enin cast two
spells. One quickly closed the rift and the second spirited them all away. The three of
them were instantaneously brought to the Borderline Inn where Holli awaited.
Ryson ran to Linda who had fallen to the ground in exhaustion. He held up her head
and called for her attention.
Linda appeared dazed as if looking far off into the distance. Her eyes were unfocused
and her body mostly limp. Ryson shook her lightly and she finally came to. She looked
about the room with a dazed expression and then into the face of the delver.
“Ryson? You’re alright?”
“Yes, I’m fine. What about you?”
“Tired.”
“Are you hurt?”
“No, I just need a moment.”
Enin stepped slowly, almost painfully, over to them both. “She will be fine. Give her a
few moments and she should even be able to stand.”
“Enin…” Ryson began angrily, but then stopped to take a deep breath. When he
continued, his tone remained bitter. “I don’t know if I can ever forgive you for this, for
bringing her there, for putting her in danger.”
“She has a gift that would protect her.”
“Protect her?” Ryson questioned, his anger growing once more. He wanted to stand
and face the wizard, but he would not take his attention away from Linda. “I saw for
myself, she was in pain. You’re as responsible for that as Baannat was.”
“No, he wasn’t,” Linda intervened. “I was. It was all an illusion and for a while I
didn’t understand that. The pain I felt was inside of me all the time.”
“It was still pain, and it was still dangerous. He shouldn’t have put you in that
position.”
Linda shook her head slowly and finally focused squarely into Ryson’s eyes with a
resolve of her own. “You have to forgive him because if you don’t then I won’t be able to
forgive you. He gave me something I needed very much, something you have always
been either unable or unwilling to give me—a chance to help you. Since I’ve known you,
you have helped so many—saved so many. You’ve never stopped thinking about other
people first. Because of that, and because of what you are, it’s almost impossible to be
able to help you. This was my chance to do that, maybe the only chance I’ll ever have. I
can live with that now because I know that when you needed me the most, I was here for
you. Enin gave me that and I will always be grateful to him for it. If you don’t forgive
him, it means you don’t understand what that means to me.”
“It was her choice,” Enin added. “I also believe it was her destiny, though on that I
can only guess. She believed it was her duty to be there for you, her responsibility. She
did not want to leave you to face Baannat on your own. I did nothing to force her and
very little to convince her. Her decision was based entirely on her concern for you. You
can blame me if you like, but it would be a dishonor to her if you did not give her the
credit she deserves.”
Ryson did not need Linda to take these kinds of risks to help him. He never expected
it of her. It wasn’t necessary. It was enough that she accepted him for what he was and
was willing to share his life with him. That was enough to ask of anyone. Still, he could
not deny the courage it took to do what she did, and he could not deny the look he saw in
her eyes as she hoped he would grasp what this meant to her. If this was something she
needed to do, something that would bring them closer, he found it impossible to argue
further. Ryson could say nothing. He held onto Linda and allowed the anger to flee from
his soul.
Holli placed a hand on Enin’s shoulder. “What about you?”
“I will be fine,” Enin answered with a tired smile. “Baannat is gone and I am still what
I was, but perhaps a bit less afraid. I just need to go home and rest for a while.”
“With me?” Holli asked somewhat hesitantly.
Enin’s answer erased her concerns. “Yes, certainly with you, and the dogs of course.”
Epilogue
Several days after his army was annihilated by the dwarves of Dunop, Sazar skulked
through a dark tunnel under Burbon with one thing on his mind, revenge. The delver had
defeated his plans on more than one occasion and the serp was now tired of losing to this
Ryson Acumen. It was the delver that helped save Dunop and brought a premature end to
Sazar’s raid of the underground dwarf city, and it was Ryson Acumen that had thwarted
the serp at Pinesway. Losing Connel, however, was the last straw. He knew Ryson was
the first to enter the caverns under the city. Sazar saw what the rock beetles saw before
the dwarves killed them off. He knew Ryson led the way, and when the dwarves followed
the delver into Connel, Sazar’s dreams of conquering the eastern lands died as well.
The more he considered what he lost, the angrier Sazar became. He had taken Connel
without losing a single minion. He removed the most trained soldiers and had the humans
ready to knuckle under to his will. The human Consprite was taking care of supplying
Tabris with test subjects for her spells. He had everything under control until that delver
appeared in the caves below Connel.
The serp could only guess what happened to Consprite and the vampire that protected
him, but for some reason he knew that Tabris was dead. He felt the power she gave him
being ripped away, and when it was gone, he somehow knew the sorceress had ceased to
exist. There was no point in returning to the desert to reaffirm his bargain with the witch.
At the moment, there was very little point in anything.
He no longer commanded an army. The horde of goblins he controlled was decimated
by the dwarves, the hook hawks shot out of the sky by the human cavalry. Only the one
giant shag that served as his body guard remained under his will, that and a small number
of razor crows. His riches were gone, his supplies hastily left behind in Connel. His
augmented power to control creatures at far distances died with the sorceress. Everything
he had obtained since coming to this cursed land was lost, and he placed the blame for
that squarely on Ryson Acumen.
There was little point in returning to what he was, a meager raider of outposts
scratching for survival. What point was there to gain control over a half dozen goblins
when he tasted the power of controlling a horde? Everything before him appeared
tarnished and this too fueled his hate for the delver.
With little incentive to do anything else, Sazar focused on this hate and vowed to gain
his revenge. He knew which town the delver called home—Burbon. When the dwarves
attacked Burbon back at the onset of the dormant season, they created several tunnels
under this town. He had discovered one that he hoped would prove useful one day.
Today, he decided upon a purpose for it. He walked within this tunnel now with a focus
on obtaining his vengeance.
Sazar used those few remaining razor crows under his power to scout out the streets of
Burbon and find where Ryson lived. He now knew of that location, and once they
reached the proper point, the shag would dig to the surface very close to that spot.
The shag could dig quickly, that was the only thing that saved Sazar in Connel. When
the dwarves flooded the interior of the city, the serp knew all was lost. His selfpreservation remained strong and he took to the dark streets with his large shag guard.
The rock beetles gave him a great understanding of the tunnels below the city before they
fell to the might of the dwarves. With that understanding, he ordered the shag to dig.
They reached the caves before the dwarves or the humans could find them and Sazar
escaped down a southern access tunnel.
Escape, however, was no longer on his mind. This time Sazar would use the shag to
reach the delver and then kill him. He didn’t care how fast the delver was or how nimble.
The shag would catch Acumen in his home where he lived with his mate. Sazar would
use the human female to distract the delver and in the close confines of the house, the
delver would die. It would be a painful death. Sazar almost smiled at this thought, but any
delight ended there.
“I’ve been waiting for you,” Sy said as he stepped out into the center of the dark
passage. He lit a torch so that they could all see equally well. “I’m sure you remember
me. I’m the captain of the guard here. You once threatened this town with destruction if
we didn’t give you what you wanted. Do you remember that?”
Sazar hissed but said nothing.
“That always left me with a bad taste in my mouth,” Sy continued. “You went on to
plunder a great deal of treasure from the dwarves because I didn’t want to risk stopping
you. I guess I have my chance now.”
Before Sazar could answer, another figure stepped into the new light of the torch.
“Hello Sazar,” Ryson offered with no true emotion beyond disgust for the creature.
“What is it you’re planning now?”
Sazar’s eyes burned red with hate as they fell upon the delver. He found his voice
quickly this time. “I plan to have you killed! So nice of you to accommodate me by
showing up here. You will not be able to outmaneuver my shag in such close quarters.”
“Are you sure your shag can defeat all three of us?” Ryson asked.
“Three?” the serp stammered aloud.
A third member of Burbon’s protectors moved out of the shadows behind Sy and
Ryson. Sazar recognized her as the elf guard.
“I can see you know me as well,” Holli offered, “but did you know that I am no longer
an elf guard? I now protect another and I do not leave his presence often. I am usually
wherever he is and that includes now.”
Sazar was not given even a moment to fully understand what that meant. The true
meaning was spelled out to him immediately as the fourth and final member of the group
stepped forward.
Enin walked past the other three directly up to Sazar. “You are an evil creature,” the
wizard said with both contempt and sadness. “You are responsible for much suffering and
that ends tonight. Did you really think I would be so naïve to leave this tunnel
unguarded? We knew you were here the moment you entered.”
Even standing beside the great shag, Sazar now feared for his life. He understood the
power of this wizard and even the shag’s physical strength was no match for that kind of
magical force. What Sazar did not notice was the shag showed no sign of agitation
whatsoever. It stood there with an empty stare simply waiting for the serp to order him
onward.
While Sazar seemed oblivious to this, Enin decided to make him more aware of the
situation. “Instead of worrying what I might do to you, you should be wondering why
your large friend hasn’t shown any alarm to our presence. Take a look at him. The truth is
he doesn’t know we are here. I am blinding him to us. He can’t see, hear, or smell us. The
only one he thinks is here is you.”
Enin paused for a moment to allow the serp to take a good long look at his protector.
“Go ahead, order him to attack us,” the wizard finally continued. “You’ll just confuse
him. There’s nothing you can do that would remove the block I have on his meager mind.
You might send him into a rage, but who knows what he might do. In his mind, there’s
no one here for him to attack, no one accept you. In fact, I would start to worry about that
if I were you.”
With that, Sazar suddenly found a new fear tearing at his twisted soul. “What do you
mean?”
Enin found no true pleasure in this moment, but he wanted to make the situation clear.
“The shag can not see, smell or hear anyone else here but you. We are in a very narrow
tunnel with no real path of escape. What do you think this shag would do right now if you
suddenly lost the ability to control him? He looks hungry to me and I think serp is a meal
he would accept.”
“You would not…” Sazar began but fear ended his sentence.
“I would and I will. I will, however, give you a very small chance. You have a few
moments to get out of this tunnel before I convince this shag he no longer has to listen to
you.”
Sazar did not waste any time arguing or begging for mercy. He turned and attempted
to move off back toward the tunnel exit. Serps, however, are not agile creatures. His run
was more of a shuffle and he made little progress.
Enin gave him more time than he first intended. As the serp moved beyond his sight
down the sloping tunnel, Enin waved his hands in front of the shag. Two pure white
circles appeared at the wizard’s fingertips and then dissolved in front of the monster’s
face.
At first, the shag appeared dazed, as if waking from a long sleep. It peered about the
tunnel trying to get its bearings. Finally, it sniffed the air. It caught a scent and turned
about. Without delay, it bounded after the serp.
Enin watched the departing monster with a heavy sigh. This signified the true end for
everything that had happened. All those that had played a part in the attack on Connel
would face the consequences of their actions. It seemed almost as if each and every
matter of importance had found a suitable conclusion—from Baannat’s destruction to the
dwarves restoring of their own honor. Everything appeared to be as it should, until he
thought of the delver and Ryson’s own deliberations regarding what was right and what
was wrong. Ryson always seemed to have such a definitive measure of things and the
wizard wondered what the delver was thinking at this very moment. Enin turned to his
friend and asked the question outright.
“I need to ask you this, Ryson. Do you think I just did the right thing?”
Ryson looked down the tunnel. He knew the shag would catch Sazar, knew that the
serp would die. He then looked down at the ground and thought of Lief. He believed the
elf would have approved without hesitation, but the question was did he approve.
“Sazar came here on his own,” Ryson offered. “He brought the shag with him. He put
himself in this situation, and I think we can all agree he didn’t come here planning to do
anyone any favors. No one twisted his arm. All you did was remove Sazar’s control of
the shag. You once told me that you can’t keep people from their fate. I’m not entirely
sure about destiny and all that, at least not the way you talk about it, but I do understand
that you can’t always escape responsibility. Eventually, it catches up to you. And in truth,
I think that’s the way it should be. Sazar pushed the limits, and tonight it caught up with
him. The only one that gets blamed for that is him. I don’t think it’s a matter of approving
or disapproving of what happened here. I just accept it.”
With that, Ryson thought of Lief again. He also thought of Reader Matthew, the old
man in Pinesway, and even Edward Consprite. None of them asked for the situation they
were placed in. Lief didn’t want to be banished from his camp. Reader Matthew certainly
didn’t ask to be sent to the Lacobian desert. The old man in Pinesway didn’t want goblins
to attack what was once his home. Even Edward Consprite didn’t ask for the events that
led to his removal as mayor—the return of magic to the land.
These were events beyond their control, but their actions to deal with these events
were not dictated to them. Each and every one of them made choices. Lief turned his
anger outward to the land and on to its inhabitants. He died fighting valiantly against an
evil sorceress, but Ryson wondered how much Lief had lost of himself before his own
end. Matthew courageously gave his life to save Ryson, and in the process reforged his
faith. The old man in Pinesway might be dead or alive, Ryson had no idea. He was living
in a dangerous place and that was his decision, but it was a decision based as much on
honoring his deceased wife as it was an unwillingness to accept other alternatives, other
paths to travel. Finally, there was Edward Consprite. He died when Lief’s arrow pierced
his heart, but there was little left to save by that point. He had moved beyond a bitter and
angry man and became a deviant dealing death for those he blamed for his misfortune.
Ryson always found it difficult to believe that any creature deserved to die, but it was just
as difficult for him to believe Consprite didn’t deserve his fate.
In the end, Ryson found it impossible to judge any of them. It was not his place.
Everyone can’t determine the circumstances they face. To Ryson, most of it always
seemed like nothing more than blind chance. He never understood why one person was
forced to face so much adversity while another simply could glide through life without
having to face a single challenge. That never made any sense. He knew good people that
faced constant misfortune and people of lesser character that somehow found wealth
wherever they looked. It didn’t seem fair and that always bothered him, it always would.
He then considered what Enin tried to tell them all, how everyone had a choice.
Maybe they couldn’t determine the fortune of their circumstances, but they could decide
how to deal with it. He thought of his very own words and how often things came down
to simple matters of responsibility and acceptance. He told Enin he would just accept
what happened here this night and that is what he was determined to do.
